Measurement: Sensors 25 (2023) 100605

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Measurement: Sensors
journal homepage: www.sciencedirect.com/journal/measurement-sensors

Diabetes prediction model using data mining techniques
Rashi Rastogi a, b, *, Mamta Bansal a
a
b

Department of CSE, Shobhit Institute of Engineering and Technology (Deemed University), Meerut, India
Sir Chottu Ram Institute of Engineering & Technology, Ch. Charan Singh University, Meerut, India

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Diabetes prediction
Disease
Data mining
SVM
Naïve bayes
Regression and random forest

Diabetes is the leading cause of death in the world, and it also affects kidney disease, loss of vision, and heart
disease. Data mining techniques contribute to health care decisions for accurate disease diagnosis and treatment,
reducing the workload of experts. Diabetes prediction is a rapidly expanding field of research. Early diabetes
prediction will result in improved treatment. Diabetes causes a variety of health issues. Therefore, it is critical to
prevent, monitor, and raise awareness about it. Type 1 and Type 2 diabetes can cause heart disease, renal
problems, and eye difficulties. In this paper, we propose a diabetes prediction model using data mining tech­
niques. We apply four data mining techniques such as Random Forest, Support Vector Machine (SVM), Logistic
Regression, and Naive Bayes. The proposed mechanism is trained using Python and analysed with a real dataset,
which is collected from Kaggle. Furthermore, the performance of the proposed mechanism is analysed using the
confusion matrix, sensitivity and accuracy performance metrices. In logistic regression, the accuracy is high, i.e.,
82.46%, in comparison to other data mining techniques.

1. Introduction

1.1. Types of diabetes

Diabetes is a chronic condition defined by an elevated blood glucose
level. Diabetes causes progressive kidney, eye, and heart damage over
time [1]. Early diabetes detection is a challenging task. Diabetes disease
can be divided into three categories: Type 1 diabetes, also known as
juvenile diabetes or insulin-dependent diabetes, occurs when the body’s
immune system damages insulin-releasing cells, halting insulin pro­
duction [2]. Type 2 diabetes, also known as insulin-independent dia­
betes, occurs when the body develops insulin resistance or stops
producing insulin [3]. It can occur at any age. Gestational diabetes is a
form of diabetes that affects pregnant women [4] (see Table 1).
Data mining is the extraction of previously unknown or previously
concealed patterns from a massive database or data warehouse [5]. It
used to play a significant role in a variety of industries, including
finance, education, healthcare, etc. [6]. Numerous organisations utilise
data mining to analyse enormous datasets, to enhance the
decision-making process, and to obtain better long-term results. Fig. 1
depicts the diabetes prediction model. In this model, the diabetes dataset
is processed by a trained model. The data is collected from sensor de­
vices. The trained model analyses data and predicts the outcome of
diabetes for the clients (see Fig. 2).

In this section types of diabetes are discussed. There are broadly four
types of diabetes. These are:
• Type 1 DM: Historically, the terms “insulin-induced diabetes melli­
tus” (IDDM) and “juvenile diabetes” were employed. The cause is
unknown. Diabetes affects youth and those under the age of 20. Type
1 will harm pancreatic cells, rendering them dysfunctional [7]. Due
to a lack of insulin secretion, type 1 diabetes patients have been
afflicted throughout their entire lives and are insulin dependent.
Patients with type 1 diabetes should constantly engage in physical
activity and have a balanced diet.
• Type 2 DM: Insulin resistance, which occurs when cells do not
respond appropriately to insulin, is the underlying cause of type 2
diabetes. Insulin insufficiency may develop as the condition ad­
vances. The phrase ‘non-insulin-based diabetes mellitus’ or ‘adultinduced diabetes’ has been used previously. Obesity and lack of ex­
ercise are the leading causes [8]. Typically, it occurs at the age of
four.
• Gestational Diabetes: This is the third basic kind of gestational
diabetes, which occurs when pregnant women develop elevated
blood sugar levels without a history of diabetes. Approximately 18%

* Corresponding author. Department of CSE, Shobhit Institute of Engineering and Technology (Deemed University), Meerut, India.
E-mail addresses: rastogi.rashi4@gmail.com (R. Rastogi), mamta.bansal@shobhituniversity.ac.in (M. Bansal).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.measen.2022.100605
Received 10 October 2022; Received in revised form 2 November 2022; Accepted 23 November 2022
Available online 5 December 2022
2665-9174/© 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/bync-nd/4.0/).

R. Rastogi and M. Bansal

Measurement: Sensors 25 (2023) 100605

1.2. Effects of diabetes

Table 1
Attributes used in dataset.
Attributes

Description

Glucose

Plasma glucose concentration over 2 h in an oral glucose
tolerance test.
It shows how many times patient is pregnant.
It indicates BP of patient.
It shows skin fold thickness.
It shows family history of patient.

Pregnancies
Blood Pressure
Skin Thickness
Diabetes Pedigree
Function
BMI
Insulin
Age
Outcome

Diabetes can affect human body such as loss of vision, kidney neu­
ropathy, liver and on heart [9]. In this section effects of diabetes have
been discussed. These are:
• Loss of vision: It is a condition that affects the retina and optic nerve
of the eye. Due to night-time vision issues and swelling in the retina,
mental contact may be diminished. A diabetic’s eye vision can be
restored with a few diagnostic procedures or pharmaceuticals.
• Kidney Neuropathy: Higher amounts of blood sugar harm the renal
arteries, resulting in chronic kidney disease or diabetic neuropathy.
The kidney is effective in transporting waste and large quantities of
water into the blood.
• Liver Problems: Through the breakdown of starch via glucogenesis
or glycogenolysis, the liver plays a crucial role in regulating the
quantity of blood glucose in the circulation. Diabetes type 2 increases
the chance of developing liver problems. A fatty liver is responsible
for the development of a liver tumour.
• Heart Disorders Cardiovascular Ailments: It’s continuous damage
to blood vessels and neurons leads to the deception of the circulatory
system or organ frame. Cardiovascular disease risk factors include
hypertension, abnormally high cholesterol and triglyceride levels,
obesity, and lack of physical activity. Multiple clinical characteris­
tics, such as poor glycaemic management and insulin resistance in
diabetes, influence cardiac issues.

It indicates Body mass index.
2-Hour serum insulin (mu U/ml)
It shows age of patient. The age group to be used is 21–81
for analysis.
1 for diabetes and 0 for non-diabetes.

of pregnant women have diabetes, according to the most recent study
on diabetes. Possibility of increased gestational diabetes in elder
women. The third major type is frequently induced by excessive
blood sugar levels in pregnant women.
• Pregestational Diabetes: Pregestational diabetes occurs prior to the
onset of insulin-dependent diabetes during pregnancy. A guy with
prediabetes is more likely to receive a score of 2 under such settings
or measurements.

Fig. 1. Diabetes prediction model.

Fig. 2. Data mining techniques.
2

R. Rastogi and M. Bansal

Measurement: Sensors 25 (2023) 100605

Organization: The paper is organised into VI sections. Section I
provides an introduction to diabetes prediction, including types of dia­
betes and the various effects of diabetes; Section II discusses data mining
techniques; Section III discusses literature reviews and survey in­
ferences; and Section IV presents a proposed mechanism in detail. Sec­
tion V presents results and analysis of the proposed mechanism. In
section VI, the conclusion and future of the manuscript have been
presented.

formed of numerous interconnected nodes with an activation func­
tion arranged in layers. The input layers provide the network with
patterns that connect to one or more hidden layers, where a system of
weighted ties performs the actual processing. After that, a secret
layer is connected to an output layer for results.
• Random Forest: RF is a tree-based collection classifier in which the
randomly assigned vectors are distributed completely differently,
with the input X serving as the unit for each tree [17]. The random
forest method is a scalable, effortless, and straightforward algorithm
that mixes tree predictors. Its performance is difficult to improve,
and it can process numerous types of numeric, binary, and nominal
data.
• Naive Bayes Classification: Bayesian networks frequently contain
classification tasks. It consists of direct acyclic graphics with one
parent and only numerous children (relative to the observed nodes),
with a crucial premise of autonomy between children in the context
of their parents [18].
• Bayesian Networks: BN are visual models intended to explain re­
lationships between events and concepts and evaluate their likeli­
hood or degree of uncertainty. As a probabilistic model, a Bayesian
network describes the variables as well as their relationships.
• Support Vector Machines (SVMs): SVMs are a class of supervised
learning techniques used to detect, identify, or regress shapes [19].

1.2.1. Contribution
• We present a model for early prediction of diabetes disease.
• We discuss different data mining techniques.
• The proposed mechanism is trained using Python for Random Forest,
Support Vector Machine (SVM), Logistic Regression, and Naive
Bayes, and analysed with a real dataset, which is collected from
Kaggle.
2. Data mining techniques
Data mining is a relatively new technique for extracting knowledge
from enormous quantities of data. Mining involves using and processing
accessible data to make judgments [10]. It involves the investigation of
models in big data sets using techniques at the intersection of machine
learning, statistics, and database systems [11]. It facilitates the exami­
nation of patterns, such as the categorization of data through cluster
studies, the recognition of abnormal records, also known as anomaly
detection, and associated rules or dependencies [12].

2.1. Application of data mining in smart healthcare
In this section applications of data mining in healthcare system such
as disease prediction, better treatment etc. has been discussed [20].
There are as follows:

•Classification: Classification is a data mining function that can be
assigned to target categories for database objects. This approach can
be used as a pre-processing step before to storing data in the classi­
fication model. Assemblages of identical components We must
cluster to locate a collection of data whose properties capture
everything and combine them according to their similarities. Clus­
tering is comparable to segmentation. It is used to classify groups of
unprocessed cases based on a range of criteria [13].
• Decision Tree (DT): Decision Tree (DT) is mostly used classification
model. As a statistical model for data processing, DT leverages a
decision tree [14]. It is used to estimate diseases and classification
techniques using patient data. It is possible to design and translate
DT quickly.
• Knowledge Discovery Dictionary (KDD): It is the process of data
and information collection discovery. It entails data processing, data
selection, data preparation, information establishment on data sets,
and interpretation of the most effective ways based on observed
findings [15]. It consists of an iterative data integration sequence and
recognition of DM patterns.
• Regression: Regression is a frequently employed function. Regres­
sion receives identical grading. It is used to forecast innumerable
numbers, age, weight, temperature, and diseases [16]. All of these
can be predicted using regression techniques. Regression tasks can
resolve several difficulties in the medical industry. Linear regression
and logistic regression are the most prevalent types of regression.
• Association: Association is the most important DM characteristic
that determines the probability of things. As rules of the association,
the relationships between working together and the items are
illustrated.
• K- means clustering: It is the process for grouping identical objects.
There are a variety of classifications, including partitions and hier­
archical clusters, however the K-means clustering technique was
chosen for this investigation. K-Means clustering, which employs
numerical data and describes K as a cluster core, is very straight­
forward or understandable.
• Artificial Neural Network: ANN is an information processing de­
vice modelled on the capability of the human brain. NNs are typically

• Disease Diagnosis and Prediction: In terms of social security firms,
we must infer and predict suffering, which is one of the most
essential reasons for using knowledge in social insurance.
• Classification of Various Hospitals: The data mining strategy fo­
cuses on each of the various health centres’ areas of concern,
considering their ultimate classification objective. Different health
clinics are identified by associations as having the ability to treat
patients with real illnesses, i.e., higher-ranking treatment clinics are
well equipped to treat high-risk patients during times of higher need.
• Successful Treatments: In contrast, medical knowledge mining is
used to divide the efficacy of pharmaceuticals into components such
as causes, signs, symptoms, and cost.
• Infection Prevention in Hospital sites: Information mining is used
to investigate contamination to find such unforeseen situations in
disease control data. A trained individual investigates these instances
further for contamination management.
• Identifying Patients at High-Risk: American Health techniques
enable diabetic clinics to increase efficiency and reduce adminis­
trative costs for diabetic patients [21].
3. Literature survey
For the purpose of diagnosing and preventing T2DM, Yang et al. [22]
suggested a novel approach using data mining techniques. Enhancing
the prediction model’s precision and generalising the model’s pre­
dictions beyond a single data set are primary goals. The model is split
into two sub-parts: an enhanced K-means algorithm and a logistic
regression method, both of which are based on a collection of
pre-processing steps. In order to forecast diabetes risk, Islam et al. [23]
need a dataset that includes information about people who are newly
diagnosed with diabetes or who are at risk of developing the condition.
They used a 520-item dataset that was acquired from surveys adminis­
tered to Sylhet Diabetes Hospital patients in Bangladesh. Furthermore,
they applied Naive Bayes, Logistic Regression, and Random Forest al­
gorithms to examine the data. Similarly, Woldemichael and Menaria
3

R. Rastogi and M. Bansal

Measurement: Sensors 25 (2023) 100605

[24] presented a mechanism using data mining methods to foresee cases
of diabetes. predicting whether or not a person has diabetes using a back
propagation algorithm. Predictions of diabetes were made using a
number of methods, including J48, naive bayes, and support vector
machine. Similarly, a prediction model was developed by Fiarni et al.
[25] to forecast the occurrence of three major complications of diabetes
in Indonesia, and key factors associated with these complications are
identified. The seven risk factors for diabetes were identified as age,
gender, BMI, family history of diabetes, blood pressure, length of time
diabetic, and blood glucose level. Therefore, k-means clustering and the
Naive Bayes Tree classification methods were utilized to examine this
data set. Furthermore, application software developed by Aldallal et al.
[26] is used by doctors and other medical professionals to foresee the
onset or recurrence of chronic diseases (NCDs). In this endeavour, they
utilized a data-mining technique that could foresee future outcomes.
Information about patients from Bahrain Defense Force Hospital was
used to test the programme. Moreover, Khan et al. [27] go into the area
of glycemic management for diabetes and research data mining-based
diagnosis and prediction solutions. In a similar manner, Kavakiotis
et al. [28] carried out a systematic analysis of diabetes research using
machine learning, data mining approaches, and tools Using three
distinct data mining organization methods: Naive Bayes (NB), Support
Vector Machine (SVM), and Decision Tree. Kumar et al. [29] evaluated
and analysed the prospective approaches to forecast the chance of heart
disease for diabetic patients based on their predictive accuracy. More­
over, the goal of Mahesh et al. [30]’s blended ensemble learning
(EL)-based forecasting system was to identify the best classifier for
evaluating clinical outcomes through a standardised set of metrics. In
this article, we suggest an EL that uses Bayesian networks and radial
basis functions. Standard predictive methods, such as K-nearest neigh­
bour (KNN) and logistic regression, are used in Oza and Bokhare [31].
By comparing the different ways that machine learning can be used, a
model is proposed to improve performance and measure accuracy.
Prediction of diabetes mellitus using data mining is well reviewed by
Anil et al. [32]. The goal is to examine and compare the predicted ac­
curacy of the various analytical approaches currently employed in this
sector through a study of studies that have used these approaches. Lo­
gistic regression analysis with data mining techniques such as decision
trees using the J48 and LMT algorithms, Naive Bayes, and Artificial
Neural Networks (ANN) was proposed by Paisanwarakiat et al. [33]. The
risk of developing diabetes was predicted using Random Forest, KNN,
and Support Vector Machine by Arumugam et al. [34]. As seen in the
outcomes, the support vector methodology is very trustworthy. A variety
of classifiers have been presented, and their structures make it possible
to choose the most appropriate one for future data analysis and inter­
pretation. Abdollahi and Moghaddam [35] employed a genetic
algorithm-based ensemble training methodology to effectively identify
and predict the consequences of diabetes mellitus. Experimental data
and genuine data on Indian diabetes from the University of California’s
website are used in this study.

Fig. 3. Proposed framework.

4. Proposed model
4.1. Problem statement
Doctors depend on normal information for treatment. When standard
information is insufficient, examines are summed up after a certain
number of cases have been considered. However, this interaction sets
aside time, though if AI is utilized, the examples can be recognised
before. To utilise AI, a gigantic amount of information is required. There
is an exceptionally restricted amount of information accessible relying
upon the infection. Additionally, the quantity of tests having no illnesses
is high compared with the number of tests actually having the infection.
Various researchers have proposed different techniques to predict dia­
betes by applying various ML classification techniques, but each one has
pros and cons. Some techniques have less accuracy while some have a
high accuracy rate, but elapsed time also increases. So, to overcome
these kinds of issues, it is intended to propose a mechanism to predict
diabetes outcomes with a high accuracy rate. In the proposed mecha­
nism, we use RF, SVM, Linear Regression, and Naive Bayes algorithms to
predict diabetes.
4.2. Proposed Framework
In this section proposed mechanism has been presented. Fig. 3 pre­
sents proposed model. Diabetes disease may occur when immune system
of human body can’t work in proper manner due to variation in the
sugar level of body or less immunity of body. In proposed mechanism
diabetes dataset is taken for processing. The dataset contains diabetes
attributes such as pregnancy, sugar level, BMI, skin thickness etc. In next
step extract features from dataset using trained model. After that apply
data mining models Naïve Bayes, SVM Logistic regression and Random
Forest for classification of diabetes into two states 1 or 0. Furthermore
once model is trained then validate model to retrieve performance of
models with accuracy, sensitivity, and confusion matrix.

3.1. Inferences drawn from literature review
• Data mining techniques are utilized by authors to predict diabetes
diseases.
• Accuracy of different algorithms are compared to find more efficient
algorithm to predict diabetes dataset.
• Different type of diabetes and their effects are studied in detail.
• Data mining algorithms are very useful to get more accurate infor­
mation at early stages are studied.

Proposed Algorithm.

It is noticed in literature review that the Data mining algorithms can
help doctors to predict diabetes at early stage in more accurate manner
so that they can diagnose the patient.

4

R. Rastogi and M. Bansal

Measurement: Sensors 25 (2023) 100605

Fig. 4. Histogram representation of dataset Attributes.

4.3. Implementation strategy

majority of medical service data contains missing value, wheezy, and
irregularity information.
• Data cleaning is the strategy of discovering and revising (or elimi­
nating) bad or erroneous records from a record set, table, or infor­
mation and refers to recognising insufficient, incorrect, mistaken, or
distracting portions of the information, some replacement, adjusting,
or erasing the messy or coarse information [8]. Data purifying is also
performed intuitively with information from 25 different in­
struments, or as execution through prearranging. Data cleansing is
also known as data cleaning or data purging.
• Data integration: Data integration could be a strategy in which het­
erogeneous information is recovered and joined as a fused kind and
design. Information reconciliation enables clients, associations, and
applications to incorporate completely and potentially extraordinary

The datasets are gathered from the information base. In stage two,
the information will be pre-handled, which will incorporate information
cleaning, mixing, and changing. By utilising RF calculation, we can
achieve better precision when compared with other calculations.
The information was acquired from Kaggle. It was gathered and,
along these lines, the data was inputted as instructing tests and back-toback investigated to supply a decent model. Data variety is the
arrangement of accommodating pertinent data that is assembled
through an exploitation question measure. The information is separated
in a very specific way, with a number of very specific categories.
• Data Pre-processing: Information pre-processing is a critical
advancement in the philosophy of information disclosure. The
5

R. Rastogi and M. Bansal

Measurement: Sensors 25 (2023) 100605

Fig. 5. Pair plot representation of Diabetes prediction outcomes.

data types (for example, data sets, reports, and tables) to be used as
close to home or business measures as possible.
• Data reduction is the change of mathematical or sequential advanced
information inferred through exact perception or by experimentation
into an adjusted, requested, and improved type. The central devel­
opment is the decrease of undeterminable measures of information in
every one of the methods directly down to the deliberate segments.

programs. Python is best suited for data mining programs.
5.1. Metrics used
• Sensitivity
It depicts total only number of positive outcomes after processing of
dataset. The formula for sensitivity calculation is as follows:

5. Results

Senitivity = TP/(TP + FN)

In this section, results and analysis have been discussed. The pro­
posed mechanism is implemented using python and jupyter notebook. It
is an open-source programming language. The execution of a pro­
gramme is fast in Python. It can provide inbuilt library files to run users’

• Accuracy
It shows the overall number of positive (+ve) outcomes in
6

R. Rastogi and M. Bansal

Measurement: Sensors 25 (2023) 100605

Fig. 6. Confusion matrix of proposed model.
Table 2
Record of used patient dataset (Age group (21–81)).

Table 4
Accuracy and Sensitivity comparison.

Male

Female

Total

Techniques

Accuracy (%)

Sensitivity (%)

358

256

614

Logistic Regression
SVM
Naïve Bayes
Random Forest Classifier

82.46
79.22
79.22
81.81

68.23
59.99
64.44
68.88

Table 3
Performance comparison using Confusion Matrices.
Techniques
Logistic Regression
SVM
Naïve Bayes
Random Forest Classifier

age more than 20. The predicted outcome i.e., Positive or negative has
been calculated on the basis of various parameters such as pregnancy,
sugar level, BMI etc. Fig. 4 depicts the histogram representation of
diabetes dataset attributes. Histograms are visual representations of data
points clustered into intervals determined by the viewer. The histogram,
which resembles a bar chart, summarises a sequence of numbers into a
manageable visual by clustering them into discrete categories called
“bins."
So here we have 9 criteria that can be used to estimate and predict
the diabetes. These criteria are the pregnancy (that is condition of

Confusion Matrix
[
]
98 9
18 29
[
]
98 9
23 24
[
]
93 14
18 29
[
]
95 12
16 31

comparison to the total number of negative (-ve) outcomes in the entire
dataset.
Accuracy = TP + TN/ (TP + FP + FN + TN)
• Confusion Matrix
It depicts the prediction values of data in terms of TP, TN, FN, FP i.e.,
true + ve, true –ve, false + ve and false -ve. Based on these parameters
the sensitivity and accuracy of techniques has been computed.
5.2. Dataset used
To analyse proposed mechanism, we use diabetes dataset down­
loaded from Kaggle. The dataset contains data values of patients having

Fig. 7. Accuracy and sensitivity comparison.
7

R. Rastogi and M. Bansal

Measurement: Sensors 25 (2023) 100605

women when give birth to child), quantity of glucose, the number or
value of blood pressure, the thickness of human skin, Body mass Ratio
also called BMI, the function of diabetes pedigree and the year to which
human body has gone through with disease & the age, these all collec­
tively going to predict the diabetes. The collective dataset of feature are
going to give crucial information about the estimation of diabetes in a
human being. All the features of our dataset play a significant task in the
prediction of diabetes. Calculating importance of each feature will help
us to find that how much each feature is relevant in finding the output of
our model.
Fig. 5 represents the pair plot of the outcome of the diabetes datasets
(see Table 2). It shows the relationship between attributes of data. Fig. 6
depicts the confusion matrix of the proposed model. The confusion
matrix represents the values of each attribute used in the dataset. Table 3
shows the comparison of SVM, RF, logistic regression, and naive bayes
models in terms of their confusion matrix. The rate of computation of
positive outcomes is high in logistic regression as compared to other
techniques. Furthermore, Table 4 depicts the comparison between data
mining techniques in terms of accuracy and sensitivity. In logistic
regression, the accuracy is high in comparison to other models.
It is crucial to provide a prompt and correct diagnosis while dealing
with disorders like diabetes. If proper care is not taken, a delay in dia­
betes diagnosis can have devastating effects on health. Therefore, the
accuracy of data mining algorithms used to anticipate a patient’s status
must be maximised. A false negative has a much greater cost impact than
a false positive. If the subject is given a false diagnosis, they may try to
relax despite the significance of their situation. Fig. 7 depicts the
sensitivity and accuracy comparison of the proposed model. In the lo­
gistic regression model, the accuracy is high, i.e., 82.46% as compared
to other models. whereas in SVM the accuracy is low, i.e., 79.22% as
compared to other models. Furthermore, the sensitivity is slightly higher
in RF, 68.88% in comparison to other models, and SVM is lower, 59.99%
in comparison to other models such as naive bayes logistic regression
and random forest.

Data availability
Data will be made available on request.
References
[1] D. Sisodia, D.S. Sisodia, Prediction of diabetes using classification algorithms,
Procedia Comput. Sci. 132 (2018) 1578–1585.
[2] M.K. Hasan, M.A. Alam, D. Das, E. Hossain, M. Hasan, Diabetes prediction using
ensembling of different machine learning classifiers, IEEE Access 8 (2020)
76516–76531.
[3] S. Larabi-Marie-Sainte, L. Aburahmah, R. Almohaini, T. Saba, Current techniques
for diabetes prediction: review and case study, Appl. Sci. 9 (21) (2019) 4604.
[4] S.I. Ayon, M.M. Islam, Diabetes prediction: a deep learning approach, Int. J. Inf.
Eng. Electron. Bus. 12 (2) (2019) 21.
[5] Z.S. Ageed, S.R. Zeebaree, M.M. Sadeeq, S.F. Kak, H.S. Yahia, M.R. Mahmood, I.
M. Ibrahim, Comprehensive survey of big data mining approaches in cloud
systems, Qubahan Acad. J. 1 (2) (2021) 29–38.
[6] W. Haoxiang, S. Smys, Big data analysis and perturbation using data mining
algorithm, J. Soft Comput. Paradigm (JSCP) 3 (2021) 19–28, 01.
[7] M. Gollapalli, A. Alansari, H. Alkhorasani, M. Alsubaii, R. Sakloua, R. Alzahrani,
W. Albaker, A novel stacking ensemble for detecting three types of diabetes
mellitus using a Saudi Arabian dataset: pre-diabetes, T1DM, and T2DM, Comput.
Biol. Med. 147 (2022), 105757.
[8] H. Ikegami, Y. Hiromine, S. Noso, Insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus in older
adults: current status and future prospects, Geriatr. Gerontol. Int. 22 (8) (2022)
549–553.
[9] Y. Liu, Q. Wang, K. Wu, Z. Sun, Z. Tang, X. Li, B. Zhang, Anthocyanins’ effects on
diabetes mellitus and islet transplantation, Crit. Rev. Food Sci. Nutr. (2022) 1–24.
[10] K.G. Al-Hashedi, P. Magalingam, Financial fraud detection applying data mining
techniques: a comprehensive review from 2009 to 2019, Comput. Sci. Rev. 40
(2021), 100402.
[11] J.R. Saura, D. Palacios-Marqués, D. Ribeiro-Soriano, Using data mining techniques
to explore security issues in smart living environments in Twitter, Comput.
Commun. 179 (2021) 285–295.
[12] Y.S. Su, S.Y. Wu, Applying data mining techniques to explore user behaviors and
watching video patterns in converged IT environments, J. Ambient Intell. Hum.
Comput. (2021) 1–8.
[13] N.P. Jayasri, R. Aruna, Big data analytics in health care by data mining and
classification techniques, ICT Express 8 (2) (2022) 250–257.
[14] R. Krishnamoorthi, S. Joshi, H.Z. Almarzouki, P.K. Shukla, A. Rizwan, C. Kalpana,
B. Tiwari, A novel diabetes healthcare disease prediction framework using machine
learning techniques, J. Healthc. Eng. 2022 (2022).
[15] A. Mavrogiorgou, A. Kiourtis, G. Manias, D. Kyriazis, An optimized KDD process for
collecting and processing ingested and streaming healthcare data, in: 2021 12th
International Conference on Information And Communication Systems (ICICS), IEEE,
2021, May, pp. 49–56.
[16] E. Pérez-Montalvo, M.E. Zapata-Velásquez, L.M. Benitez-Vazquez, J.M. CermenoGonzalez, J. Alejandro-Miranda, M.A. Martinez-Cabero, Á. de la Puente-Gil, Model
of monthly electricity consumption of healthcare buildings based on climatological
variables using PCA and linear regression, Energy Rep. 8 (2022) 250–258.
[17] V. Simic, A. Ebadi Torkayesh, A. Ijadi Maghsoodi, Locating a disinfection facility
for hazardous healthcare waste in the COVID-19 era: a novel approach based on
Fermatean fuzzy ITARA-MARCOS and random forest recursive feature elimination
algorithm, Ann. Oper. Res. (2022) 1–46.
[18] H. Yoshikawa, Can naive Bayes classifier predict infection in a close contact of
COVID-19? A comparative test for predictability of the predictive model and
healthcare workers in Japan, J. Infect. Chemother. 28 (6) (2022) 774–779.
[19] S. Chidambaranathan, A. Radhika, V.V. Priya, S.K. Mohan, M.G. Gireeshan,
Optimal SVM based brain tumor MRI image classification in cloud internet of
medical things, in: Cognitive Internet of Medical Things for Smart Healthcare,
Springer, Cham, 2021, pp. 87–103.
[20] J. Santos-Pereira, L. Gruenwald, J. Bernardino, Top data mining tools for the
healthcare industry, J. King Saud Univ. Comput. Inf. Sci. (2021).
[21] A. Guzzo, A. Rullo, E. Vocaturo, Process mining applications in the healthcare
domain: a comprehensive review, Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Data Min.
Knowl. Discov. 12 (2) (2022) e1442.
[22] H. Wu, S. Yang, Z. Huang, J. He, X. Wang, Type 2 diabetes mellitus prediction
model based on data mining, Inform. Med. Unlocked 10 (2018) 100–107.
[23] M.M. Islam, R. Ferdousi, S. Rahman, H.Y. Bushra, Likelihood prediction of diabetes
at early stage using data mining techniques, in: Computer Vision and Machine
Intelligence in Medical Image Analysis, Springer, Singapore, 2020, pp. 113–125.
[24] F.G. Woldemichael, S. Menaria, Prediction of diabetes using data mining
techniques, in: 2018 2nd International Conference on Trends in Electronics and
Informatics (ICOEI), IEEE, 2018, May, pp. 414–418.
[25] C. Fiarni, E.M. Sipayung, S. Maemunah, Analysis and prediction of diabetes
complication disease using data mining algorithm, Procedia Comput. Sci. 161
(2019) 449–457.
[26] A. Aldallal, A.A.A. Al-Moosa, Using data mining techniques to predict diabetes and
heart diseases, in: 2018 4th International Conference on Frontiers Of Signal
Processing (ICFSP), IEEE, 2018, September, pp. 150–154.
[27] F.A. Khan, K. Zeb, M. Al-Rakhami, A. Derhab, S.A.C. Bukhari, Detection and
prediction of diabetes using data mining: a comprehensive review, IEEE Access 9
(2021) 43711–43735.

6. Conclusion and future work
Nowadays, data mining plays a crucial role in diabetes prediction in
the healthcare system. Diabetes is a major health challenge in the world.
Early prediction of diabetes will result in improved results. This paper
presents a diabetes prediction model with the help of data mining
techniques. We apply Naive Bayes, Logistic Regression, Random Forest,
and Support Vector Machine techniques to predict diabetes disease. The
proposed mechanism is implemented using Python. To analyse the
proposed mechanism, a real dataset is collected from Kaggle. Accuracy,
confusion, and sensitivity matrices are used to assess performance. In
the logistic regression model, the accuracy is high, i.e., 82.46% as
compared to other models. whereas in SVM the accuracy is low, i.e.,
79.22% as compared to other models. In the future, it is intended to
continue working on it and apply more classification algorithms to
predict diabetes datasets. It is also meant to suggest a new way to make
predictions about diabetes outcomes more accurate.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Rashi Rastogi: Methodology, Writing – original draft, preparation.
Mamta Bansal: Conceptualization, Visualization, Writing – review &
editing.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence
the work reported in this paper.

8

R. Rastogi and M. Bansal

Measurement: Sensors 25 (2023) 100605
[32] K.S. Anil, R. Jain, Data mining techniques in diabetes prediction and diagnosis: a
review, in: 2022 6th International Conference on Trends in Electronics and
Informatics (ICOEI), IEEE, 2022, April, pp. 1696–1701.
[33] R. Paisanwarakiat, A. Na-udom, J. Rungrattanaubol, Combining logistic regression
analysis with data mining techniques to predict diabetes, in: International
Conference on Computing and Information Technology, Springer, Cham, 2022,
pp. 88–98.
[34] S.S. Arumugam, V. Kuppan, V. Chakravarthi, K. Palaniappan, An accurate
diagnosis of diabetes using data mining, in: AIP Conference Proceedings, vol. 2405,
AIP Publishing LLC, 2022, April, 1, p. 020017.
[35] J. Abdollahi, B. Nouri-Moghaddam, Hybrid stacked ensemble combined with
genetic algorithms for diabetes prediction, Iran J. Comput. Sci. (2022) 1–16.

[28] I. Kavakiotis, O. Tsave, A. Salifoglou, N. Maglaveras, I. Vlahavas, I. Chouvarda,
Machine learning and data mining methods in diabetes research, Comput. Struct.
Biotechnol. J. 15 (2017) 104–116.
[29] A. Kumar, P. Kumar, A. Srivastava, V.D. Ambeth Kumar, K. Vengatesan, A. Singhal,
Comparative analysis of data mining techniques to predict heart disease for
diabetic patients, in: International Conference on Advances In Computing And Data
Sciences, Springer, Singapore, 2020, April, pp. 507–518.
[30] T.R. Mahesh, D. Kumar, V. Vinoth Kumar, J. Asghar, B. Mekcha Bazezew,
R. Natarajan, V. Vivek, Blended Ensemble Learning Prediction Model for
Strengthening Diagnosis and Treatment of Chronic Diabetes Disease, vol. 2022,
Computational Intelligence and Neuroscience, 2022.
[31] A. Oza, A. Bokhare, Diabetes prediction using logistic regression and K-nearest
neighbor, in: Congress on Intelligent Systems, Springer, Singapore, 2022,
pp. 407–418.

9

