Transcriber's Note:

Apparent typographical errors have been corrected, and the use of
hyphens has been normalized.

The author does not identify the transliteration scheme(s) used for
Indian words in the text. Macrons (as in "ā") are used extensively and
there is some use of the "diacritic dot" (as in "ṇ").

Text in italics is indicated by _underscores_ and text in black-letter
font is indicated by +plus signs+. Small capitals have been replaced by
full capitals.




The Cambridge Manuals of Science and Literature

THE PEOPLES OF INDIA


 CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS
 +London+: FETTER LANE, E.C.
 C. F. CLAY, MANAGER

[Illustration: university crest]

 +Edinburgh+: 100, PRINCES STREET
 +Berlin+: A. ASHER AND CO.
 +Leipzig+: F. A. BROCKHAUS
 +New York+: G. P. PUTNAM'S SONS
 +Bombay and Calcutta+: MACMILLAN AND CO., LTD.

_All rights reserved_


[Illustration:

 Brāhmans
 (_Mirzapur district_)]


[Illustration: title page

 THE PEOPLES OF INDIA
 BY
 J. D. ANDERSON, M.A.

 Teacher of Bengali in the
 University of Cambridge, formerly
 of the Indian Civil Service

 Cambridge:
 at the University Press

 1913]

 +Cambridge+:
 PRINTED BY JOHN CLAY, M.A.
 AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS

_With the exception of the coat of arms at the foot, the design on the
title page is a reproduction of one used by the earliest known Cambridge
printer, John Siberch, 1521_




PREFACE


The writing of this little book has been delayed by the hope I once
cherished of incorporating in it some of the results of the Indian
Census of 1911. This desire was inevitable in the case of a retired
Indian official, who, like most of his kind, has taken a small part in
one or more of the decennial numberings of the Indian people. In this
country, a Census affords material chiefly for the calculations and
theories of the statistician, and the Registrar-General is not regarded
as an expert in Anthropology or Linguistics. But in India the case is
very different. If the district officer is always glad to learn as much
as possible of the people with whom he is brought into contact, his
official duties often reveal only the seamy side of Indian life, and it
is only when he is in camp, or snatching a rare and hurried holiday in
shooting, that he gets to see something of the people otherwise than as
litigants or payers of revenue. A census is an agreeable and welcome
opportunity for looking at India from another and more genially human
point of view. In the first place, it is one of the least expensive of
official operations, since it is chiefly performed by unpaid and
volunteer agency. Hence the official, a little weary of litigants,
touts, pleaders, and subordinates, who, however amiable in their private
lives, are apt to be indolent and obstructive in office, is glad to make
acquaintance with new friends, who, for the most part, take an
intelligent and amused interest in the unfamiliar task of numbering. For
many busy weeks before the actual counting takes place, the district
officer has to ride far and near, to satisfy himself that all necessary
preparations have duly been made, to issue the instructions that may be
called for by the zeal, inquisitiveness or density of his volunteer
colleagues. In the process, he has many pleasant and some amusing
experiences. On one occasion I rode into a little village on the
north-eastern frontier, inhabited by semi-savage Tibeto-Burmese people.
Official orders as to the numbering of all the house in legible figures
had apparently not been obeyed. I simulated wrath and disappointment,
but the worthy headman on whom I vented my (purely official) indignation
was not dismayed. "Bring out your drums!" he shouted. Every householder
produced the family kettle-drum, on the head of which the number of his
house had been duly inscribed in large figures. There was no paper in
the village, but parchment was invented before paper, and the headman
deserved the commendation I was glad to bestow. On another occasion, I
found a house numbered indeed, but grievously dilapidated and obviously
deserted. "Why is this empty house numbered?" I asked. "It is haunted by
a ghost, sir," answered the enumerator. I confess I felt sorry not to
allow him to include this ghostly visitant in a census of living men.
Other incidents, more ethnologically important than these, will
frequently occur. In any case the Census Report of an Indian province is
by far the most interesting official document in existence, and each
census adds something to our knowledge of Indian humanity, if only
because each Census Commissioner, always an officer of unusual ability
and attainments, looks at his task from a point of view somewhat
different from that of his predecessors, and stamps his individuality on
the work of his subordinates. Those who have read Mr E. A. Gait's
article on _Caste_ in the _Dictionary of Ethics and Religion_ will
expect the census of 1911 to contain new views and fresh information as
to the actual working of the caste system in various provinces, and its
relation to the religious ideas of the people.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was natural, then, that I should wish to learn from a new tapping of
the source from which has been compiled, for the most part, the ethnical
portion of the first volume of the Imperial Gazetteer of India, which
has been my chief authority in compiling this little book. But I know
not when Mr Gait's Report for all India will be ready, and even the
Provincial Reports come but slowly from the Press. Most of them are full
of the most interesting and valuable information, but it takes time to
assimilate so much new matter, and, in any case, not much of it could
have been utilized for so small and elementary a book. Hence I have
simply to state my debt to the late Sir H. H. Risley and Mr E. A. Gait
for the chapter on Race and Caste; to Sir G. A. Grierson for the chapter
on Languages, and to Mr William Crooke for enabling me further to
summarise his masterly summary of what is known about Indian Religions.
It is a particular pleasure to acknowledge my indebtedness to my friend
Sir G. A. Grierson. Years ago, when we were young men, it was known that
in him the Indian Civil Service possessed a scholar and a linguist of
most unusual industry and ability. But few knew that there was
germinating in his mind the scheme for the great _Linguistic Survey of
India_, the most remarkable feat of administrative scholarship, perhaps,
that has ever been attempted, a feat that has won him the _Prix Volney_
and I know not what other appreciations of his work in France and
Germany. His learning and linguistic skill are widely known, but I must
seize the opportunity to tell of another feature of his achievement. Of
course no man knows more than a few of the hundreds of Indian languages,
but there is one man who knows something of the working and mechanism of
them all, and that is Sir G. A. Grierson. I had the privilege of helping
him with part of the Bodo volume of his _Survey_, having had occasion to
learn one or two Tibeto-Burman languages in the course of official duty.
The practised ease with which he acquired the syntactical and phonetic
peculiarities of languages with which he had no previous acquaintance
was the most surprising and delightful intellectual performance I have
ever witnessed.

I have ventured occasionally to enliven my chiefly borrowed narrative
with personal ideas or reminiscences. Such digressions have however been
few and brief, and I do not think I need apologise for them.

I have to thank Miss Lilian Whitehouse and my son, Lieut. M. A.
Anderson, R.E., for the two diagrammatic maps which will, I hope, clear
up any geographical difficulties created by a necessarily brief account
of a large and complicated subject.

I owe the illustrations of caste types to the kindness of Mr William
Crooke. They are from photographs of inhabitants of one single district
of the United Provinces and are interesting as showing how in a single
small area racial differences show themselves in such a way as to be
recognisable by the most careless observer. They prove once more how
stratified Indian humanity has become under the influence of caste rules
of marriages.

J. D. A.

_September, 1913._




CONTENTS


 CHAP.                                                       PAGE

       PREFACE                                                  v

       INTRODUCTION                                             1

    I. RACE AND CASTE                                          13

   II. THE LANGUAGES OF INDIA                                  54

  III. THE RELIGIONS OF INDIA                                  81

       BIBLIOGRAPHY                                           113

       INDEX                                                  115




ILLUSTRATIONS


PLATE

Brāhmans (_Mirzapur district_)                      _Frontispiece_

   I. Mahābrāhmans (_Mirzapur district_)        _To face page_ 12

  II. Kāyasthas—the writer caste (_Mirzapur
        district_)                                    "        24

 III. Dharkārs (_Mirzapur district_)                  "        36

  IV. Banjara women (_Mirzapur district_)             "        48

   V. Seoris or Savaras (_Mirzapur district_)         "        60

  VI. A Bhuiyār (_Mirzapur district_)                 "        72

 VII. A Ghāsiya (_Mirzapur district_)                 "        84




MAPS


The Indian Empire—Distribution of Population      _At end of book_

The Indian Empire—Distribution of Prevailing
  Languages                                               "




INTRODUCTION


It is necessary, once more, to remind the reader that the peninsula of
India has an area and population roughly equal to the area and
population of Europe without Russia. Everyone who has learnt geography
at school is familiar with the great triangle, its base in the soaring
Himalayan heights in the north, its apex jutting into the Indian Ocean,
and marked by the satellite island of Ceylon. To the north, then, is the
great mountain barrier, a tangled mass of snowy peaks, glaciers and
snowfields, separating the sunny plains of India proper from the
plateaux of Central Asia. Beneath them lie wide river basins, sandy and
dry as unirrigated Egypt to the west; moist, warm, and waterlogged to
the east. To the south of the valleys of the Indus and the Ganges is the
central plateau, home of many aboriginal races. This rises on the west
into a castellated rampart of hills facing the Arabian Sea, and on the
south slopes away into green undulating uplands. So much, at least, of
geographical description must be given as a clue to the distribution of
the peoples of India. Along the Himalayas, growing stronger in numbers
as we go eastwards, are races mostly of a Mongolian type, mingled with
purely Indian elements. In the Panjāb and the United Provinces, sending
offshoots southwards along the well-watered west coast, are the peoples
in whom the traces of Aryan immigration are most visible. In Bengal we
find a duskier race, provisionally termed Mongolo-Dravidian, but with a
strong infusion, in the upper classes, of western blood. In the south
are a still darker population almost wholly Dravidian. It is in the most
ancient part of India, in the high plateau of the Deccan, that there
still dwell the peoples who are probably the aborigines of the land and
use the most purely Indian languages, the various Dravidian dialects.
The geologically recent valleys of the Indus and Ganges are the home of
races, mingled with aboriginal peoples, whose language and physical
features show that in them is a strong strain of immigrant blood.

On the Himalayan slopes, in Assam, and especially in Burma, are
Tibeto-Burman peoples, with something of a Japanese aspect. Intermingled
with all these, in forests and on rough and hardly accessible hills, are
scattered many groups of semi-savage folk, of whom little was known till
the gradual spread of British rule carried the administrator, the
missionary, and finally the anthropologist, into regions once considered
unfit for the presence of civilised men.

So far, it may be said, the distribution of Indian humanity is not very
unlike that of the races of Europe. Even this very crude summary, it is
true, shows at least three great groups of languages, Dravidian in the
south, Indo-European in the west and north-west, Tibeto-Burman in the
north and the north-east. There are in fact five separate families of
human speech which have their homes in India; the Aryan, the Dravidian,
the Mundā, the Mon-Khmer, and the Tibeto-Chinese. The lateral spread of
these is, of course, no real indication of the present habitat of five
different races of men. But they do indicate the existence, in varying
degrees of purity, of five different origins, of which the Dravidian and
Mundā alone can be said to be purely indigenous and confined to the
Indian peninsula. Nowhere is it more easy than in India to see how
languages spread from race to race, from tribe to tribe, with a sort of
linguistic contagion; the stronger, more supple, more copious, more
cultivated languages replacing and gradually destroying weaker forms of
speech. Something of the same sort has occurred, and is even now
happening, in Europe. But the surviving European languages are mostly
sturdy and vigorous, and do not readily yield place to one another. In
India the process of linguistic invasion is going on before our eyes,
attendant on the gradual growth of Hindu civilisation and religion,
which disdains to practise open and reasoned proselytism, but extends
its borders nevertheless, and carries with it one or another of the
Aryan dialects.

In spite of the spread of the stronger languages, the five great
families of Indian speech remain and testify to more varied origins than
those of Europe. One of the first results of familiarity with Indian
peoples is a sense of their remarkable variety of aspect and culture.
When the stranger lands in India, his first feeling is one of
bewildering sameness; the dusky beings that surround him seem as like
one another as sheep, or peas. But that sensation is merely due to the
predominance of unfamiliar colour, and soon gives way to an impression
of astonishing and most interesting variety. This variety is exhibited
by the careful anthropometric investigations of the ethnologist. But
there is more variety than average measurements show, and the rough
impressions of the experienced administrator and traveller are not
without their value. For instance, Sir William Hunter, in his work on
_The Indian Empire_, classified the highlanders of Chota Nagpore as a
race apart, whom he called Kolārians. Sir H. H. Risley says that "the
distinction between Kolārians and Dravidians is purely linguistic, and
does not correspond to any differences of physical type." As a matter of
average physical measurements, this criticism is just. The average
dimensions of Sonthal skulls are the same as those of other Dravidian
races. But he would be a poor observer of racial characteristics, who
could not pick out a typical inhabitant of Chota Nagpore from a crowd of
southern Dravidians. Even in parts of Bengal where such "Kolārian" folk
have settled some generations ago, and have acquired the local language
and dress, they are almost as easily distinguished as a Hindu
undergraduate in Cambridge. If physical characters are rightly divided
into "indefinite" signs of race, which can only be described with
difficulty and hesitation in ordinary language, and the "definite" signs
which can be measured and reduced to figures, yet the general aspect of
a tribe or caste is the first thing which strikes an experienced
enquirer's eye, and leads him to make further and more detailed
investigations.

So is it also with those divisions, peculiar to India, which are known
to us by the Portuguese name of _caste_. The Indian name for caste is
_varna_, or "colour," and physical differences between different castes
were fairly obvious even before accurate averages were struck between
many individual measurements. Caste has undoubtedly tended, and for
similar reasons, to perpetuate such differences between classes of men
as we readily recognise between different breeds of horses or cattle.
The ages of men succeed one another more slowly than the generations of
domestic animals, and segregation, in spite of caste rules, has probably
at no time been so rigid as in the case of pure-bred animals. But there
is a restriction in the matter of marriage which has been more or less
efficacious, and especially so in the case of the higher castes, where
the women are more carefully guarded, and pride of birth influences the
future mothers of the race. In some rare instances, castes are still
racial, preserved from immixture by much the same feeling which leads
the white American to protect his race from a mingling of Negro or Red
Indian blood. Other castes are still recognisably the result and record
of such forbidden mixtures. Sometimes the resulting difference is so
great as to be visible in actual measurements. Often the result is a
mere peculiarity of aspect, such as enables an expert to identify a
mongrel or a crossbreed among domesticated animals. In any case, once a
caste is formed, it is fenced in by matrimonial rules, strict in
proportion to the social status and consideration of the group. Not
only, then, are the racial origins of modern India more various than
those of Europe, but such varieties of colour, stature, and culture as
exist tend to be perpetuated.

It has been said, somewhat paradoxically, that whereas in Europe the
divisions between races of men cut perpendicularly, as it were, so as to
be more or less local and geographical, in India the separating lines
run horizontally, and represent social strata. This, of course, is only
partly true. The ancient Hindu theory of caste assumes the existence of
four great divisions of Hindu humanity, extending all over India;
namely, Brāhmans or priests, Kshatriyas, or warriors; Vaiçyas, or
trading and professional folk; and Sūdras, who are most justly and aptly
to be described as "the remainder." In all parts of Hindu India may be
found representatives of this ancient and theoretical division of
humanity, the first two usually claiming a western origin as eagerly as
some of us claim a tincture of Norman blood. But it would be incorrect
to say that even the highest and purest of these four divisions is of
uniform race, or anything approaching to it, all over India. A Bengali
Brāhman, for instance, can be more or less easily distinguished from
other Bengalis, if he has the typical appearance of his caste. But he is
even more easily distinguished from Brāhmans of other Provinces. How
much of this last difference is due to mixture of blood, how much to
difference of food and climate, it is, of course, difficult to say. But
certainly caste produces a difference of breed in addition to the
ethnical varieties of origin which differentiate the Indian populations
from those of Europe.

Thirdly, some clue to Indian racial differences may be found in the
religions of the peninsula. The greatest of these is still the Indian
religion _par excellence_, the wonderful collection of varied
speculations, beliefs, and practices known to us as Hinduism, and its
daughter, the religion of Buddha. The latter has spread far and wide,
has subjugated Ceylon and Burma, and is the leading religion of the Far
East. At one time, it was supposed to be entirely or nearly extinct in
India, although students had discovered traces of its influence in the
Vishnuvite sects of Hinduism. Recent researches have shown that an
almost unaltered form of Buddhism survives in the very bosom of
Hinduism, and is practised under Hindu names among certain castes of
Bengal and Orissa. It is to be noted that the investigations into these
survivals have been for the most part conducted by Bengali Hindus, among
whom is springing up a school of ethnologists and comparative linguists,
who only need a better knowledge and understanding of European methods
to be invaluable aids to western research in such matters. In Bengal, a
work of purely anthropological interest has actually been published in
the vernacular, an interesting account of the Chakmas, a Tibeto-Burman
but partly Hinduised race on the eastern border of Bengal. Closely akin
to the lower forms of Hinduism, and often subtly blending with them, are
many Animistic religions, most of them professed by aboriginal tribes,
speaking one or other of the aboriginal languages.

Islam and Christianity are, of course, imported and proselytising
religions, and yield few if any clues to racial or social origins. Many
Muhammadans profess to be, and not a few are, of authentic foreign
origin. But during the seven hundred years of Muslim rule in India,
there was much intermarriage with native races, and even more
conversion. It is curious that, as in the case of Christianity, the
conversions have been mostly among tribes and classes of the humbler
sort. These were not denied admission into Hinduism, but they were only
admitted on terms of social and racial degradation. Islam and
Christianity alike claim to overlook the accidents of birth and status,
and hence attract those to whom Hinduism only offered a place among the
lowest ranks of its social hierarchy. But even in the case of the
religions of Christ and Muhammad, the inveterate Indian tendency to
recognise and insist on breed and social status has asserted itself
again and again. Among Muhammadans, the Arabic tribal names have come to
be the designations of social units which differ but little from the
endogamous castes of Hinduism, and the same tendency is already evident
among Christian converts. There is a marked reluctance in some quarters
among ex-Hindus to intermarry with ex-Muslims, or even to participate in
sacramental Communion with them.

As with caste, so with religion, the divisions are not strictly
horizontal. As Christianity is not one thing all over Europe, but has
differences of creed, ritual, and practice corresponding to racial
differences, so the Hinduism, and even the Muhammadanism, of different
provinces varies. There is no sharp boundary; there are elements in
common wherever we go. But just as Dravidian temple architecture can be
easily distinguished, even by the unpractised eye, from that of the
edifices of the Gangetic plains, so local peculiarities of belief or
ritual may come to the aid of the anthropologist, and may suggest or
confirm distinctions more easily verified and more capable of scientific
proof.

The study of all these matters is not without a practical and
administrative interest at the present time. A hundred and fifty years
ago, to the racial, tribal, and caste differences, accompanied by
differences of language and religion, were added political divisions,
accentuated by frequent dynastic or predatory wars. British rule
has introduced two powerful unifying influences. Our system of
administration, while it is adapted more or less effectively (more in
some cases, less in others, according to the talent and character of
local officers) to local precedents and local needs, is moulded by the
great supervising and consolidating authority of the Governor-General in
Council.

Secondly, higher education in India is conducted for the most part in
English, and educated India, rapidly growing in numbers, has English for
its second language, and is modifying local beliefs, usages,
aspirations, patriotisms in accordance with ideas more or less
consciously assimilated from European teachers and models. No one can
deny that this new unity of India is the direct result of centralised
British rule. In the far distance of time, all or nearly all India
would, for a while, accept the domination of some Hindu ruler or
dynasty. Under the Muhammadans, similarly, there were times when the
Emperor at Delhi was the ruler of all or nearly all India. Under British
rule, a much wider and more populous India, ranging from Baluchistan to
Burma, and only excepting the semi-independent states which have been
allowed to retain sovereign powers, is really and for the first time
part of the greatest administration on earth except that of China, if we
look to numbers. It is a result, as the history of British India shows,
for which we cannot claim the whole credit. The direction of the great
work of unification has been in British hands; it has chiefly been
carried out by indigenous agency, and, in matters of detail, in
deference to Indian ideas and Indian suggestions. Even fifty years ago,
few Indians supposed that the wide Empire of India could be governed
save under British guidance, or without the aid of British bayonets. The
old habitual forces of disruption were too obvious; the distrust of one
race for another was still too keenly felt to allow Indian politicians
to imagine a united India under indigenous rule. But as the educated
classes grow in power, in numbers, in self-reliance, and reliance on one
another; as some of them are promoted to posts of higher trust and
authority in India, and even in England, it is perhaps only natural that
Indians should suppose that, so far as politics and administration are
concerned, the old divisions and dissensions are obsolete, and that
united India can in future be governed by native agency. That is not a
matter with which ethnology has anything to do. It is the ethnologist's
business merely to record impartially what racial, tribal, social, and
religious differences still survive, and, if he can, to show how far
they have been, and are being, obliterated by the spread of education,
and by growing self-confidence and ambition among educated Indians.
Whether the information the ethnologist collects can be put to any
administrative use does not concern him, nor does he desire that his
impartiality shall be affected by these considerations. But, in a little
book of this kind it may not be amiss to point out that one result of
British rule has been the growth of a new type of Indian, the educated
Indian; who, whether he be Hindu or Muhammadan or Buddhist, is at least
inclined to subordinate the old hereditary divisions to common political
ambitions. These ambitions affect the fortunes and the future of some
three hundred millions of humbler Indians, at present only linked by the
accident of common British rule, and, so far as they are Hindus, by a
common Hindu sentiment.

[Illustration: _Plate I_

 Mahābrāhmans
 (_Mirzapur district_)]

In the following chapters, it will be my business to tell, as briefly
and clearly as possible, of (1) the Ethnology and Castes of the Indian
Peoples; (2) the Languages of India; (3) the Religions of India. I hope
what I have already said will sufficiently show why these three subjects
are treated in this order.




CHAPTER I

RACE AND CASTE


Curiously enough, the systematic enquiry into the physical
race-characteristics of the Indian peoples was due to a daring assertion
by Mr Nesfield, of the Indian Educational Service, to the effect that,
so far as physical signs go, there is practically only one Indian race
and one Indian caste. This was a hasty but quite natural generalisation
from experience of a part of India, the United Provinces, which is in
the heart of the Aryan settlement in the Gangetic _do-āb_ (the area
between "two rivers"). Here caste has long been a settled institution,
and innumerable sub-castes, professional or the result of outcasting,
have come into existence. Mr Nesfield was driven by his local
observations to assert the unity of one great Indian race; he denied the
truth of "the modern doctrine which divides the population of India into
Aryan and aboriginal": he sturdily declared that it was impossible to
distinguish a scavenger from a Brāhman, save by costume and other
artificial and accidental marks. Even in the United Provinces this
uncompromising statement awoke dissent. In other parts of India, as, for
instance, on the north-eastern frontier, the crowded home of many races
and languages, dissent was eager and loud. It was evident, on the face
of it, that Mr Nesfield's new dogma was based on too limited a study.
Caste, for him, was a mere matter of hereditary function and profession;
since most castes in the sacred "midland" of Hinduism have assumed that
guise. There is no reason to suppose that castes have usually or even
often been formed as professional guilds. They come into being for many
reasons, some of which will be presently stated; and in civilised
communities, where the division of labour and specialisation of
professional skill are well established, a caste gradually assumes some
distinctive means of livelihood. But on the borders of Hinduism, where
the Hindu social system is still assimilating new races, instances
abound of racial castes, tribal castes, perhaps even (though this is a
more doubtful matter) totemistic castes.

Those who had the widest experience of the Peninsula were convinced that
its races were at least as varied as those of Europe: those who, like Mr
Nesfield, had made a close study of one limited tract, might have
continued to believe that under the superficial distinctions of caste
and class lay a real unity of race. But Mr (afterwards Sir H. H.) Risley
had spent the early years of his Indian service among the Dravidian
tribes of Chota Nagpore, and was aware that they differ more widely from
the people Mr Nesfield had studied than an Englishman differs from a
Turk. The difference, indeed, was almost as great as that between a
European and a Chinaman. Could such differences be registered and
described in such a way as to convince minds accustomed to scientific
accuracy in statement? Mr Risley thought he saw his way to an
ethnological classification of Indian races and castes by means of the
then comparatively new methods of anthropometry. In 1891, he published
in the _Journal of the Anthropological Institute_ a paper which marked
the beginning of systematic ethnological studies in India. It contained
a summary of the measurements of eighty-nine castes and tribes of
Bengal, the United Provinces, and Bihār. It dealt, therefore, with the
great alluvial plain, created by the Ganges and Indus, which lies
between the Himalayas and the _massif central_ of the Deccan. Here is
the home of the Aryan immigrants, where the great Indo-European
languages are spoken by communities as numerous as the larger European
nations. Anthropometry showed in the plainest, the most incontrovertible
way, that the caste system of marriages had sorted out men into classes
possessing definite and recognisable physical characteristics. There
were local differences, and caste differences. It only remained to
extend anthropometrical measurements to other parts of India to prove
that the many languages and religious beliefs of India are associated
with an even greater variety of physical qualities. Such enquiries are
still in progress, but many notable results have already been obtained,
especially by Mr Edgar Thurston, in his now famous investigations into
Dravidian ethnography.

The most important and significant measurement is that of the shape of
the head. It is, of course, impossible to take a man at random and to
say with certainty that the excessive length or breadth of his skull
proves him to belong to a given race. But the average skull-measurements
of a race are distinctive, and confirm, on the whole, the impressions
created by general aspect, colour, language and other vaguer
indications. The general result is as follows. At either end of the
Himalayan range, in Baluchistan on the west, and in Assam and Burma on
the east, broad heads prevail. Broad too are the heads of the mostly
Mongolian races inhabiting the valleys of the southern slopes of the
Himalayas, and in a belt of country running down the western coast at
least as far south as Coorg. In the Panjāb, Rājputānā, and the United
Provinces, tracts where the climate is dry and healthy, where great
summer heat is compensated for by a bracing winter, where wheat is for
the most part the staple food, long heads predominate. In Bihār,
travelling eastwards, medium heads are most common. In the damp and
steamy delta of Bengal, inhabited by over forty millions of rather dusky
rice-eating people, there is a marked tendency towards the Mongolian
brachy-cephaly of Tibeto-Burman races. It is visible among the
Muhammadans and Chandāls of Eastern Bengal, people who are probably
indigenous in this tract, it is more marked among the Kāyasthas, the
writer-caste of Bengal, which claims a western and Aryan origin. It
reaches its maximum development among the Bengali Brāhmans. South of the
Vindhya mountains, where the population is chiefly Dravidian, with a
comparatively small and ancient mixture of northern blood, the prevalent
type is mainly long-headed or medium-headed. The coast-population has
been much affected by foreign influences. On the east coast Malayan,
Indo-Chinese and even Portuguese settlers have altered the local type.
On the west coast, Arab, Persian, African, European, and Jewish
immigrants have mingled with local races, and have changed their
physiognomy, stature, and character of mind and body.

It is still a moot point, which the Mendelists may some day settle for
us, whether head-form is a true hereditary race-characteristic, whether
the osseous structure of the body generally is not a result of climate,
food and other such circumstances of environment. Yet the shape of the
head as shown by average measurements does mark off races of men which
are separated by other differences than those of habitat. They do
correspond to those vaguer yet unmistakeable characteristics which
enable us to tell one race from another. The Mongolian, even when he
settles in the plains of Assam, Bengal, or Burma and takes to a diet of
rice and fish, keeps his round head and his smooth hairless face. The
Aryan of the north-west has a markedly long head, which, in his case,
goes with a fair complexion and luxuriant beard. The Dravidian, darkest
of Indian races, with a tendency to crinkly or curly hair, has also a
long or medium head. The mixed races of Bengal have, it is not
surprising to find, medium heads, which tend in the upper castes to
become broad.

Another significant index to race is the measurement of the nose. The
results of nose-measurements roughly divide the peoples of India into
three classes—those having narrow or fine noses (leptorrhine), in which
the width is less than 70 per cent. of the height; those having medium
noses (mesorrhine), with an average index of from 70 to 85; and
broad-nosed (platyrrhine) people, the width of whose noses exceed 85 per
cent. Here we get a physical means of distinguishing between the
long-headed people of north-western India, fair and stalwart, and the
almost equally long-headed dusky folk of the south. For the average nose
of southern India, in Madras, the Central Provinces, and Chota Nagpore,
is broad. In the Panjāb and Baluchistan we get fine noses of what, to us
Europeans, seems an aristocratic type. In Afghanistan, noses are so long
and hooked as to give the tall and vigorous Afghan a Jewish aspect. In
the rest of India, and especially down the west coast, noses are of
medium type. A still more interesting discovery is the fact that
anywhere outside the Aryan tracts of the north-west, the broad nose is a
distinct sign of aboriginal blood. In Bengal, for instance, the lower
castes have broad noses. The priestly and writer castes, for all their
broad heads, have fine noses, which support their claim to a western
origin. Roughly speaking, the broad nose goes with primitive forms of
social organisation, with totemistic exogamous clans. Finer noses are
usually associated with communities of a more modern type; and above
these again come social units, castes and tribes, which claim descent
from eponymous saints and heroes.

A third physical measurement enables us to effect a further sorting out
of Indian races. What is called the "flatness" of the Mongolian face is
plain to the most careless observer. This is due chiefly to the
formation of the cheekbone, and its relation to the socket of the eye
and the root of the nose. This can be measured and expressed in figures,
with the result that the Mongoloid people of the north-east and the
Himalayan region can be definitely distinguished from the broad-headed
races of Baluchistan, Bombay, and Coorg.

Finally, it is possible to arrive at the average stature of various
Indian races and communities. The tallest races are found in the
north-west, in Baluchistan, the Panjāb and Rājputānā. A progressive
diminution is seen as we go down the valley of the Ganges, until we find
very short folk among the Assam hill tribes. The Dravidians of the south
are shorter than the Aryans of the north. The smallest Indian tribe is
that of the Negritos of the Andaman Islands, whose average height is
only 4 feet 10½ inches.

From a careful comparison of these measurements, Sir Herbert Risley
arrived at the classification of Indian humanity, which, for the moment,
is the accepted division, into seven main physical types. Beginning with
the north-western frontier, these are as follows:—

(1) The _Turko-Iranian_ type, which comprises the Baloches, Brāhuis and
Afghans of Baluchistan and the north-west Frontier Province. These are
probably the result of a fusion of Turkī and Persian blood, and are all
Muhammadans. The general aspect is wholly different from that of other
Indian races, and no one who has ever seen an Afghan or Baloch, with his
long Jewish nose and plentiful hair and beard, can ever confuse this
type with any other. In temperament also these men of the border differ
from other Indians. They are a fierce and warlike race, engaged in
constant blood-feuds with one another.

(2) The _Indo-Aryan_ type, with its home in the Panjāb, Rājputānā and
Kashmir, has as its most conspicuous members the Rājputs, Khattris and
Jāts. These, in all but colour (and even in colour they are hardly more
dusky than the races round the Mediterranean) closely resemble the
well-bred European in type. In stature they are tall, their complexion
is fair; "eyes dark; hair on face plentiful; head long; nose narrow and
prominent, but not specially long." One significant peculiarity of this
group is that there is little difference in physical character between
the upper and lower classes. This, as we shall presently see, is what we
should expect from what is known of the history of these peoples. The
upper social ranks probably represent the blood, but little diluted with
indigenous mixture, of the Aryan immigrants. Even in the lower classes,
the typical Aryan characteristics are now so prominent that any
indigenous strain that exists is no longer noticeable in average
measurements. Only in height, a quality especially sensitive to
differences of food and sanitation, are the lower castes inferior. Here
we get a remarkable modern instance of transformation of type. The
preaching of the Sikh reformers, involving a change of food and the
inculcation of martial discipline and fervour, has converted the
despised scavenging Chuhrā into the soldierly Mazhabi, once a
redoubtable foe of the English, and now one of the finest soldiers in
the British army.

(3) The _Scytho-Dravidian_ type, including the Marāthā Brāhmans, the
Kunbīs, and the Coorgs of western India. These peoples differ from the
Turko-Iranian races in being shorter, in having longer heads, higher
noses, and flatter faces.

(4) The _Aryo-Dravidian_ or Hindostāni type, which exists in the United
Provinces, in parts of Rājputānā, and in Bihār. This type appears to be
due to a mixture of Indo-Aryan and Dravidian strains. The higher classes
resemble Indo-Aryans, the lower have a distinctly Dravidian aspect. Yet,
even to the eye, they form a type apart and are easily recognised. In
this type, the average nose-index corresponds exactly to social status.
The noses grow broader as we go downwards in the social scale.

(5) The very interesting _Mongolo-Dravidian_ or _Bengali_ type which is
found in Bengal and Orissa. Here Aryan influences may still be detected
in the upper classes, but there has been extensive mingling with
Tibeto-Burman and Dravidian peoples, and other aboriginal inhabitants.
The main distinguishing feature is the broad head, which is most
conspicuous in the upper classes. It is shared equally by the Bengali
Brāhman, who claims a western origin, and the Chittagong Mag, whose
Tibeto-Burman origin is not denied. The Brāhman, on the other hand,
inherits a fine and narrow nose, which may very well be due to
Indo-Aryan ancestry. Recent investigations tend to show that Buddhism
survived till a comparatively recent date in Bengal. Hence, no doubt, a
temporary disregard of caste restrictions and a freer mixture with local
strains.

(6) The _Mongoloid_ type of the Himalayas, Nepāl, Assam, and Burma. "The
head is broad: complexion dark, with a yellowish tinge; hair on face
scanty; stature short or below average; nose fine to broad; face
characteristically flat; eyelids often oblique." Here we have races
which, if somewhat dark, correspond to the ideas most of us entertain
about the external aspect and temperament of the Siamese or Japanese. In
intellectual ability, and what we may call the artistic faculty, they
are inferior to the Bengali. Most Europeans, however (or is it,
therefore?) find them among the most congenial of Indian races. They are
social, good-natured, straightforward people. In the western Himalayas,
there has been intermixture with Aryan invaders, as in the Kangra Valley
and Nepāl, and the ruling dynasties claim Rājput origin, for the
Indo-Aryans loved to settle in the cool hills, much as the Anglo-Indian
does to this day. But on the mountainous frontiers of North-East Bengal
and Assam, the Mongoloid peoples have remained undisturbed till our own
time. Linguistically, this group is peculiarly interesting, since they
speak many tongues, many of which still remain to be recorded and
studied by European scholars.

(7) The _Dravidian_ type, which extends from Ceylon to the valley of the
Ganges and covers all South-Eastern India. It is found in Madras,
Hyderabad, the Central Provinces, most of Central India, and Chota
Nagpore. Its purest representatives dwell on the Malabar coast and in
Chota Nagpore. Here we have probably the original inhabitants of India,
now modified in some degree by an infiltration of Aryan, Scythian and
Mongoloid elements. "The stature is short or below mean; the complexion
very dark, approaching black; hair plentiful, with an occasional
tendency to curl; eyes dark; head long; nose very broad, sometimes
depressed at the root, but not so as to make the face appear flat."

[Illustration: _Plate II_

 Kāyasthas—the writer caste
 (_Mirzapur district_)]

It must, of course, be understood, that these types and the names
allotted to them merely show that in certain areas the average
characteristics of the peoples dwelling there can be sufficiently
separated to be recognisable not only by eye but by the callipers of the
anthropologist. The names, it will be noticed, in some cases, imply
theories as to the origin of the races thus grouped together. These
theories are partly based on measurements, partly on tradition, partly
on linguistic considerations. It remains for me to state, very rapidly,
what these theories are.

That the Dravidians are the oldest race in India is rendered _primâ
facie_ probable by the fact that they inhabit the southernmost part of
the peninsula, between races who can with some certainty be called
invaders—and the deep sea. There is a remarkable uniformity of physical
characteristics among the lower specimens of this type. They have in
common an animistic religion, their distinctive language, their peculiar
stone monuments, and a primitive system of totemism. They do not
resemble Europeans on the one hand, or the races of the Far East on the
other. Until proof to the contrary is forthcoming they may well be
regarded as the autochthones of India.

There is more room for difference of opinion as to the origins of the
brilliant and highly civilised Indo-Aryans of the Panjāb and Rājputānā.
As I have said before, we have here a population closely resembling that
of modern Europe in many respects. I might have added that it still more
closely resembles the Europe of the Roman empire. Nowhere else in Hindu
India does caste sit so lightly, or approach so nearly to the social
classes of Europe. Though there are rules, or rather customs, forbidding
intermarriage between different castes, yet these are mitigated by the
custom, not unknown to ourselves, of _hypergamy_. This simply means that
a man may take a wife from a lower caste, but will not give his
daughters to men of that caste. The result is a uniformity of physical
type found nowhere else in India. Moreover these people speak a language
of the Indo-European family, and have many words and idioms in common
with ourselves. The present theory of their origin is simply that they
are in the bulk immigrants into India, immigrants who came into the land
from the north-west with their herds and families, as the Jews entered
into and possessed Palestine.

One chief objection to this theory is that the lands through which they
must have passed are in no way fitted to be an _officina gentium_, being
now dry, barren, and all but deserted. But abundant indications remain
to show that the climate of South-Eastern Persia and the tracts to the
north has changed within comparatively recent times. The relics of
crowded populations and ancient civilisations abound in regions now
sandy desert, and there is evidence in the tales told by Greek and
Chinese travellers that the Panjāb itself, most of it comparatively
arid, was once well wooded. The theory then is that the homogeneous and
handsome population of the Panjāb and Rājputānā represents the almost
pure descendants of Aryan settlers, who carried the Indo-European
languages now prevailing over Northern India, just as our own emigrants
took the English language to America.

But we have also to account for the Aryo-Dravidians who inhabit the
sacred "midland" country of Hinduism, and here we have Dr Hoernle's now
famous theory, remarkably confirmed by the researches of Sir George
Grierson's _Linguistic Survey_. This theory supposes that a second swarm
of Aryan-speaking people, perhaps driven forward by the change of
climate in central Asia, entered India through the high and difficult
passes of Gilgit and Chitral, and established themselves in the fertile
plains between the Ganges and the Jumna. They followed a route which
made it impossible for their women to accompany them. They took to
themselves wives from the daughters of dusky Dravidian aborigines. Here,
by contact with a different, and in their sentiment, inferior race,
caste came into being. Here most of the Vedic hymns were composed. Here,
by a blending of imported and indigenous religious ideals, the ritual
and usages of Hindu religion came into being, to spread in altered forms
east and west and south. The necessity for this second hypothesis is
twofold. It accounts for the marked ethnical barrier which separates
western from eastern Hindustan. Elsewhere the various types melt
imperceptibly into one another. Here alone is a definite racial border
line. Again, the theory accounts for the fact that the Vedic hymns
contain no description whatever of the earlier Aryan migration, and for
the fact that the inhabitants of the middle land always felt a dislike
for the early immigrants as men of low culture and barbarous manners.
For the present, at all events, and perhaps for all time, Dr Hoernle's
ingenious theory holds the field.

No special theory is required to account for the physical and mental
qualities of the Mongolo-Dravidians of Bengal. No doubt the original
population was Dravidian with a strong intermixture of Tibeto-Burmese
blood, especially in the east and north-east. But the Hindu religion,
developed in the sacred Midlands round Benares, spread to Bengal,
bringing with it the Indo-European speech which in medieval times became
the copious and supple Bengali tongue. From the west too came what we in
Europe would call the gentry, the priestly and professional castes.
These have acquired most of the local physical characters, dusky skin,
low stature, round heads. But in nearly all cases, the fineness and
sharp outline of the nose shows their aristocratic origin, and in some
instances a Bengali Brāhman has all the physical distinction of a
western priest or sage.

When we turn to the Scytho-Dravidian group we have again to fall back on
records of ancient invasions from the north. Ancient some of them were,
but far less ancient than the settlement of the Aryans in the
north-west. The Sakas have provided India with one of its many
chronological eras; they founded dynasties which have left coins behind
them, they have left vague but widely spread traditions. They were what
we Europeans call Scythians. They were known to the Persians, the
Parthians, and the Chinese. Their original home seems to have been in
the south of China, a land of pre-eminently round-headed races. We know
that they established their dominion over portions of the Panjāb, Sind,
Gujarāt, Rājputānā and Central India. If they have left traces of their
settlement on their descendants we may reasonably expect to find
round-headed races and tribes in regions mostly surrounded by
long-headed peoples. Such a zone of broad-headed people does in fact
extend from the western Panjāb right through the Deccan, till it finally
ends in Coorg. Sir H. H. Risley's theory is that the Scythians first
occupied the great grazing country of the western Panjāb, and finding
their progress eastwards blocked by the Indo-Aryans, turned southwards,
mingled with the Dravidians, and became the ancestors of the warlike
Marātha