E-text prepared by the Project Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading
Team (http://www.pgdp.net/)



THE YOUNG TRAILERS

A Story of Early Kentucky

by

JOSEPH A. ALTSHELER







Appleton-Century-Crofts, Inc.
New York
Copyright, 1907, by
D. Appleton and Company
All rights reserved. This book, or parts thereof, must not be
reproduced in any form without permission of the publishers.
Copyright 1934 by Sallie B. Altsheler
Printed in the United States of America




TO
SYDNEY
A YOUNG KENTUCKIAN




CONTENTS

       I.--Into the Unknown

      II.--The First Great Exploit

     III.--Lost in the Wilderness

      IV.--The Haunted Forest

       V.--Afloat

      VI.--The Voice of the Woods

     VII.--The Giant Bones

    VIII.--The Wild Turkey's "Gobble"

      IX.--The Escape

       X.--The Cave Dust

      XI.--The Forest Spell

     XII.--The Primitive Man

    XIII.--The Call of Duty

     XIV.--The Return

      XV.--The Siege

     XVI.--A Girl's Way

    XVII.--The Battle in the Forest

   XVIII.--The Test

     XIX.--An Errand and a Friend




THE YOUNG TRAILERS




CHAPTER I

INTO THE UNKNOWN


It was a white caravan that looked down from the crest of the mountains
upon the green wilderness, called by the Indians, _Kain-tuck-ee_. The
wagons, a score or so in number, were covered with arched canvas,
bleached by the rains, and, as they stood there, side by side, they
looked like a snowdrift against the emerald expanse of forest and
foliage.

The travelers saw the land of hope, outspread before them, a wide sweep
of rolling country, covered with trees and canebrake, cut by streams of
clear water, flowing here and there, and shining in the distance, amid
the green, like threads of silver wire. All gazed, keen with interest
and curiosity, because this unknown land was to be their home, but none
was more eager than Henry Ware, a strong boy of fifteen who stood in
front of the wagons beside the guide, Tom Ross, a tall, lean man the
color of well-tanned leather, who would never let his rifle go out of
his hand, and who had Henry's heartfelt admiration, because he knew so
much about the woods and wild animals, and told such strange and
absorbing tales of the great wilderness that now lay before them.

But any close observer who noted Henry Ware would always have looked at
him a second time. He was tall and muscled beyond his years, and when he
walked his figure showed a certain litheness and power like that of the
forest bred. His gaze was rapid, penetrating and inclusive, but never
furtive. He seemed to fit into the picture of the wilderness, as if he
had taken a space reserved there for him, and had put himself in
complete harmony with all its details.

The long journey from their old home in Maryland had been a source of
unending variety and delight to Henry. There had been no painful
partings. His mother and his brother and young sister were in the fourth
wagon from the right, and his father stood beside it. Farther on in the
same company were his uncles and aunts, and many of the old neighbors.
All had come together. It was really the removal of a village from an
old land to a new one, and with the familiar faces of kindred and
friends around them, they were not lonely in strange regions, though
mountains frowned and dark forests lowered.

It was to Henry a return rather than a removal. He almost fancied that
in some far-off age he had seen all these things before. The forests and
the mountains beckoned in friendly fashion; they had no terrors, for
even their secrets lay open before him. He seemed to breathe a newer and
keener air than that of the old land left behind, and his mind expanded
with the thought of fresh pleasures to come. The veteran guide, Ross,
alone observed how the boy learned, through intuition, ways of the
wilderness that others achieved only by hard experience.

They had met fair weather, an important item in such a journey, and
there had been no illness, beyond trifling ailments quickly cured. As
they traveled slowly and at their ease, it took them a long time to pass
through the settled regions. This part of the journey did not interest
Henry so much. He was eager for the forests and the great wilderness
where his fancy had already gone before. He wanted to see deer and bears
and buffaloes, trees bigger than any that grew in Maryland, and
mountains and mighty rivers. But they left the settlements behind at
last, and came to the unbroken forest. Here he found his hopes
fulfilled. They were on the first slopes of the mountains that divide
Virginia from Kentucky, and the bold, wild nature of the country pleased
him. He had never seen mountains before, and he felt the dignity and
grandeur of the peaks.

Sometimes he went on ahead with Tom Ross, the guide, his chosen friend,
and then he considered himself, in very truth, a man, or soon to become
one, because he was now exploring the unknown, leading the way for a
caravan--and there could be no more important duty. At such moments he
listened to the talk of the guide who taught the lesson that in the
wilderness it was always important to see and to listen, a thing however
that Henry already knew instinctively. He learned the usual sounds of
the woods, and if there was any new noise he would see what made it. He
studied, too, the habits of the beasts and birds. As for fishing, he
found that easy. He could cut a rod with his clasp knife, tie a string
to the end of it and a bent pin to the end of a string, and with this
rude tackle he could soon catch in the mountain creeks as many fish as
he wanted.

Henry liked the nights in the mountains; in which he did not differ from
his fellow-travelers. Then the work of the day was done; the wagons were
drawn up in a half circle, the horses and the oxen were resting or
grazing under the trees, and, as they needed fires for warmth as well as
cooking, they built them high and long, giving room for all in front of
the red coals if they wished. The forest was full of fallen brushwood,
as dry as tinder, and Henry helped gather it. It pleased him to see the
flames rise far up, and to hear them crackle as they ate into the heart
of the boughs. He liked to see their long red shadows fall across the
leaves and grass, peopling the dark forest with fierce wild animals; he
would feel all the cosier within the scarlet rim of the firelight. Then
the men would tell stories, particularly Ross, the guide, who had
wandered much and far in Kentucky. He said that it was a beautiful land.
He spoke of the noble forests of beech and oak and hickory and maple,
the dense canebrake, the many rivers, and the great Ohio that received
them all--the Beautiful River, the Indians called it--and the game, with
which forests and open alike swarmed, the deer, the elk, the bear, the
panther and the buffalo. Now and then, when the smaller children were
asleep in the wagons and the larger ones were nodding before the fires,
the men would sink their voices and speak of a subject which made them
all look very grave indeed. It sounded like Indians, and the men more
than once glanced at their rifles and powderhorns.

But the boy, when he heard them, did not feel afraid. He knew that
savages of the most dangerous kind often came into the forests of
Kentucky, whither they were going, but he thrilled rather than shivered
at the thought. Already he seemed to have the knowledge that he would be
a match for them at any game they wished to play.

Henry usually slept very soundly, as became a boy who was on his feet
nearly all day, and who did his share of the work; but two or three
times he awoke far in the night, and, raising himself up in the wagon,
peeped out between the canvas cover and the wooden body. He saw a very
black night in which the trees looked as thin and ghostly as shadows,
and smoldering fires, beside which two men rifle on shoulder, always
watched. Often he had a wish to watch with them, but he said nothing,
knowing that the others would hold him too young for the task.

But to-day he felt only joy and curiosity. They were now on the crest of
the last mountain ridge and before them lay the great valley of
Kentucky; their future home. The long journey was over. The men took off
their hats and caps and raised a cheer, the women joined through
sympathy and the children shouted, too, because their fathers and
mothers did so, Henry's voice rising with the loudest.

A slip of a girl beside Henry raised an applauding treble and he smiled
protectingly at her. It was Lucy Upton, two years younger than himself,
slim and tall, dark-blue eyes looking from under broad brows, and
dark-brown curls, lying thick and close upon a shapely head.

"Are you not afraid?" she asked.

"Afraid of what?" replied Henry Ware, disdainfully.

"Of the forests over there in Kentucky. They say that the savages often
come to kill."

"We are too strong. I do not fear them."

He spoke without any vainglory, but in the utmost confidence. She
glanced covertly at him. He seemed to her strong and full of resource.
But she would not show her admiration.

They passed from the mountain slope into a country which now sank away
in low, rolling hills like the waves of the sea and in which everything
grew very beautiful. Henry had never seen such trees in the East. The
beech, the elm, the hickory and the maple reached gigantic proportions,
and wherever the shade was not too dense the grass rose heavy and rank.
Now and then they passed thickets of canebrake, and once, at the side of
a stream, they came to a salt "lick." It was here that a fountain
spouted from the base of a hill, and, running only a few feet, emptied
into a creek. But its waters were densely impregnated with salt, and all
around its banks the soft soil was trodden with hundreds of footsteps.

"The wild beasts made these," said the guide to Henry. "They come here
at night: elk, deer, buffalo, wolves, and all the others, big and
little, to get the salt. They drink the water and they lick up the salt
too from the ground."

A fierce desire laid hold of the boy at these words. He had a small
rifle of his own, which however he was not permitted to carry often. But
he wanted to take it and lie beside the pool at night when the game came
down to drink. The dark would have no terrors for him, nor would he need
companionship. He knew what to do, he could stay in the bush noiseless
and motionless for hours, and he would choose only the finest of the
deer and the bear. He could see himself drawing the bead, as a great
buck came down in the shadows to the fountain and he thrilled with
pleasure at the thought. Each new step into the wilderness seemed to
bring him nearer home.

Their stay beside the salt spring was short, but the next night they
built the fire higher than ever because just after dark they heard the
howling of wolves, and a strange, long scream, like the shriek of a
woman, which the men said was the cry of a panther. There was no danger,
but the cries sounded lonesome and terrifying, and it took a big fire to
bring back gayety.

Henry had not yet gone to bed, but was sitting in his favorite place
beside the guide, who was calmly smoking a pipe, and he felt the
immensity of the wilderness. He understood why the people in this
caravan clung so closely to each other. They were simply a big family,
far away from anybody else, and the woods, which curved around them for
so many hundreds of miles, held them together.

The men talked more than usual that night, but they did not tell
stories; instead they asked many questions of the guide about the
country two days' journey farther on, which, Ross said, was so good, and
it was agreed among them that they should settle there near the banks of
a little river.

"It's the best land I ever saw," said Ross, "an' as there's lots of
canebrake it won't be bad to clear up for farmin'. I trapped beaver in
them parts two years ago, an' I know."

This seemed to decide the men, and the women, too, for they had their
share in the council. The long journey was soon to end, and all looked
pleased, especially the women. The great question settled, the men
lighted their pipes and smoked a while, in silence, before the blazing
fires. Henry watched them and wished that he too was a man and could
take part in these evening talks. He was excited by the knowledge that
their journey was to end so soon, and he longed to see the valley in
which they were to build their homes. He climbed into the wagon at last
but he could not sleep. His beloved rifle, too, was lying near him, and
once he reached out his hand and touched it.

The men, by and by, went to the wagons or, wrapping themselves in
blankets, slept before the flames. Only two remained awake and on guard.
They sat on logs near the outskirts of the camp and held their rifles in
their hands.

Henry dropped the canvas edge and sought sleep, but it would not come.
Too many thoughts were in his mind. He was trying to imagine the
beautiful valley, described by Ross, in which they were to build their
houses. He lifted the canvas again after a while and saw that the fires
had sunk lower than ever. The two men were still sitting on the logs and
leaning lazily against upthrust boughs. The wilderness around them was
very black, and twenty yards away, even the outlines of the trees were
lost in the darkness.

Henry's sister who was sleeping at the other end of the wagon awoke and
cried for water. Mr. Ware raised himself sleepily, but Henry at once
sprang up and offered to get it. "All right," Mr. Ware said.

Henry quickly slipped on his trousers and taking the tin cup in his hand
climbed out of the wagon. He was in his bare feet, but like other
pioneer boys he scorned shoes in warm weather, and stubble and pebbles
did not trouble him.

The camp was in a glade and the spring was just at the edge of the
woods--they stopped at night only by the side of running water, which
was easy to find in this region. Near the spring some of the horses and
two of the oxen were tethered to stout saplings. As Henry approached, a
horse neighed, and he noticed that all of them were pulling on their
ropes. The two careless guards were either asleep or so near it that
they took no notice of what was passing, and Henry, unwilling to call
their attention for fear he might seem too forward, walked among the
animals, but was still unable to find the cause of the trouble. He knew
everyone by name and nature, and they knew him, for they had been
comrades on a long journey, and he patted their backs and rubbed their
noses and tried to soothe them. They became a little quieter, but he
could not remain any longer with them because his sister was waiting at
the wagon for the water. So he went to the spring and, stooping down,
filled his cup.

When Henry rose to his full height, his eyes happened to be turned
toward the forest, and there, about seven or eight feet from the ground,
and not far from him he saw two coals of fire. He was so startled that
the cup trembled in his hand, and drops of water fell splashing back
into the spring. But he stared steadily at the red points, which he now
noticed were moving slightly from side to side, and presently he saw
behind them the dim outlines of a long and large body. He knew that this
must be a panther. The habits of all the wild animals, belonging to this
region, had been described to him so minutely by Ross that he was sure
he could not be mistaken. Either it was a very hungry or a very ignorant
panther to hover so boldly around a camp full of men and guns.

The panther was crouched on a bough of a tree, as if ready to spring,
and Henry was the nearest living object. It must be he at whom the great
tawny body would be launched. But as a minute passed and the panther did
not move, save to sway gently, his courage rose, especially when he
remembered a saying of Ross that it was the natural impulse of all wild
animals to run from man. So he began to back away, and he heard behind
him the horses trampling about in alarm. The lazy guards still dozed and
all was quiet at the wagons. Now Henry recalled some knowledge that he
had learned from Ross and he made a resolve. He would show, at a time,
when it was needed, what he really could do. He dropped his cup, rushed
to the fire, and picked up a long brand, blazing at one end.

Swinging his torch around his head until it made a perfect circle of
flame he ran directly toward the panther, uttering a loud shout as he
ran. The animal gave forth his woman's cry, this time a shriek of
terror, and leaping from the bough sped with cat-like swiftness into the
forest.

All the camp was awake in an instant, the men springing out of the
wagons, gun in hand, ready for any trouble. When they saw only a boy,
holding a blazing torch above his head, they were disposed to grumble,
and the two sleepy guards, seeking an excuse for themselves, laughed
outright at the tale that Henry told. But Mr. Ware believed in the truth
of his son's words, and the guide, who quickly examined the ground near
the tree, said there could be no doubt that Henry had really seen the
panther, and had not been tricked by his imagination. The great tracks
of the beast were plainly visible in the soft earth.

"Pushed by hunger, an' thinking there was no danger, he might have
sprung on one of our colts or a calf," said Ross, "an' no doubt the boy
with his ready use of a torch has saved us from a loss. It was a brave
thing for him to do."

But Henry took no pride in their praise. It was no part of his ambition
merely to drive away a panther, instead he had the hunter's wish to kill
him. He would be worthy of the wilderness.

Henry despite his lack of pride found the world very beautiful the next
day. It was a fair enough scene. Nature had done her part, but his
joyous mind gave to it deeper and more vivid colors. The wind was
blowing from the south, bringing upon its breath the odor of wild
flowers, and all the forest was green with the tender green of young
spring. The cotton-tailed hares that he called rabbits ran across their
path. Squirrels talked to one another in the tree tops, and defiantly
threw the shells of last year's nuts at the passing travelers. Once they
saw a stag bending down to drink at a brook, and when the forest king
beheld them he raised his head, and merely stared at these strange new
invaders of the wilds. Henry admired his beautiful form and splendid
antlers nor would he have fired at him had it even been within orders.
The deer gazed at them a few moments, and then, turning and tossing his
head, sped away through the forest.

All that he saw was strange and grand to Henry, and he loved the
wilderness. About noon he and Ross went back to the wagons and that
night they encamped on the crest of a range of low and grassy hills.
This was the rim of the valley that they had selected on the guide's
advice as their future home, and the little camp was full of the
liveliest interest in the morrow, because it is a most eventful thing,
when you are going to choose a place which you intend shall be your home
all the rest of your days. So the men and women sat late around the
fires and even boys of Henry's age were allowed to stay up, too, and
listen to the plans which all the grown people were making. Theirs had
not been a hard journey, only long and tedious--though neither to
Henry--and now that its end was at hand, work must be begun. They would
have homes to build and a living to get from the ground.

"Why, I could live under the trees; I wouldn't want a house," whispered
Henry to the guide, "and when I needed anything to eat, I'd kill game."

"A hunter might do that," replied Ross, "but we're not all hunters an'
only a few of us can be. Sometimes the game ain't standin' to be shot at
just when you want it, an' as for sleepin' under the trees it's all very
fine in summer, if it don't rain, but 'twould be just a least bit chilly
in winter when the big snows come as they do sometimes more'n a foot
deep. I'm a hunter myself, an' I've slept under trees an' in caves, an'
on the sheltered side of hills, but when the weather's cold give me for
true comfort a wooden floor an' a board roof. Then I'll bargain to sleep
to the king's taste."

But Henry was not wholly convinced. He felt in himself the power to meet
and overcome rain or cold or any other kind of weather.

Everybody in the camp, down to the tiniest child, was awake the next
morning by the time the first bar of gray in the east betokened the
coming day. Henry was fully dressed, and saw the sun rise in a
magnificent burst of red and gold over the valley that was to be their
valley. The whole camp beheld the spectacle. They had reached the crest
of the hill the evening before, too late to get a view and they were
full of the keenest curiosity.

It was now summer, but, having been a season of plenteous rains, grass
and foliage were of the most vivid and intense green. They were entering
one of the richest portions of Kentucky, and the untouched soil was
luxuriant with fertility. As a pioneer himself said: "All they had to do
was to tickle it with a hoe, and it laughed into a harvest." There was
the proof of its strength in the grass and the trees. Never before had
the travelers seen oaks and beeches of such girth or elms and hickories
of such height. The grass was high and thick and the canebrake was so
dense that passage through it seemed impossible. Down the center of the
valley, which was but one of many, separated from each other by low easy
hills, flowed a little river, cleaving its center like a silver blade.

It was upon this beautiful prospect that the travelers saw the sun rise
that morning and all their troubles and labors rolled away. Even the
face of Mr. Ware who rarely yielded to enthusiasm kindled at the sight
and, lifting his hand, he made with it a circle that described the
valley.

"There," he said. "There is our home waiting for us."

"Hurrah!" cried Henry, flinging aloft his cap. "We've come home."

Then the wagon train started again and descended into the valley, which
in very truth and fact was to be "home."




CHAPTER II

THE FIRST GREAT EXPLOIT


They found the valley everything in beauty and fertility that Ross had
claimed for it, and above all it had small "openings," that is, places
where the trees did not grow. This was very important to the travelers,
as the labor of cutting down the forest was immense, and even Henry knew
that they could not live wholly in the woods, as both children and crops
must have sunshine to make them grow. The widest of these open spaces
about a half mile from the river, they selected as the site of their new
city to which they gave the name of Wareville in honor of their leader.
A fine brook flowed directly through the opening, but Ross said it would
be a good place, too, to sink a well.

It was midsummer now and the period of dry weather had begun. So the
travelers were very comfortable in their wagon camp while they were
making their new town ready to be lived in. Both for the sake of company
and prudence they built the houses in a close cluster. First the men,
and most of them were what would now be called jacks-of-all-trades,
felled trees, six or eight inches in diameter, and cut them into logs,
some of which were split down the center, making what are called
puncheons; others were only nicked at the ends, being left in the rough,
that is, with the bark on.

The round logs made the walls of their houses. First, the place where
the house was to be built was chosen. Next the turf was cut off and the
ground smoothed away. Then they "raised" the logs, the nicked ends
fitting together at the corner, the whole inclosing a square. Everybody
helped "raise" each house in turn, the men singing "hip-hip-ho!" as they
rolled the heavy logs into position.

A place was cut out for a window and fastened with a shutter and a
larger space was provided in the same manner for a door. They made the
floor out of the puncheons, turned with the smooth side upward, and the
roof out of rough boards, sawed from the trees. The chimney was built of
earth and stones, and a great flat stone served as the fireplace. Some
of the houses were large enough to have two rooms, one for the grown
folks and one for the children, and Mr. Ware's also had a little lean-to
or shed which served as a kitchen.

It seemed at first to Henry, rejoicing then in the warm, sunny weather,
that they were building in a needlessly heavy and solid fashion. But
when he thought over it a while he remembered what Ross said about the
winters and deep snows of this new land. Indeed the winters in Kentucky
are often very cold and sometimes for certain periods are quite as cold
as those of New York or New England.

When the little town was finished at last it looked both picturesque and
comfortable, a group of about thirty log houses, covering perhaps an
acre of ground. But the building labors of the pioneers did not stop
here. Around all these houses they put a triple palisade, that is three
rows of stout, sharpened stakes, driven deep into the ground and rising
full six feet above it. At intervals in this palisade were circular
holes large enough to admit the muzzle of a rifle.

They built at each corner of the palisade the largest and strongest of
their houses,--two-story structures of heavy logs, and Henry noticed
that the second story projected over the first. Moreover, they made
holes in the edge of the floor overhead so that one could look down
through them upon anybody who stood by the outer wall. Ross went up into
the second story of each of the four buildings, thrust the muzzle of his
rifle into every one of the holes in turn, and then looked satisfied.
"It is well done," he said. "Nobody can shelter himself against the wall
from the fire of defenders up here."

These very strong buildings they called their blockhouses, and after
they finished them they dug a well in the corner of the inclosed ground,
striking water at a depth of twenty feet. Then their main labors were
finished, and each family now began to furnish its house as it would or
could.

It was not all work for Henry while this was going on, and some of the
labor itself was just as good as play. He was allowed to go considerable
distances with Ross, and these journeys were full of novelty. He was a
boy who came to places which no white boy had ever seen before. It was
hard for him to realize that it was all so new. Behold a splendid grove
of oaks! he was its discoverer. Here the little river dropped over a
cliff of ten feet; his eyes were the first to see the waterfall. From
this high hill the view was wonderful; he was the first to enjoy it.
Forest, open and canebrake alike were swarming with game, and he saw
buffaloes, deer, wild turkeys, and multitudes of rabbits and squirrels.
Unaccustomed yet to man, they allowed the explorers to come near.

Ross and Henry were accompanied on many of these journeys by Shif'less
Sol Hyde. Sol was a young man without kith or kin in the settlement, and
so, having nobody but himself to take care of, he chose to roam the
country a great portion of the time. He was fast acquiring a skill in
forest life and knowledge of its ways second only to that of Ross, the
guide. Some of the men called Sol lazy, but he defended himself. "The
good God made different kinds of people and they live different kinds of
lives," said he. "Mine suits me and harms nobody." Ross said he was
right, and Sol became a hunter and scout for the settlement.

There was no lack of food. They yet had a good supply of the provisions
brought with them from the other side of the mountains, but they saved
them for a possible time of scarcity. Why should they use this store
when they could kill all the game they needed within a mile of their own
house smoke? Now Henry tasted the delights of buffalo tongue and beaver
tail, venison, wild turkey, fried squirrel, wild goose, wild duck and a
dozen kinds of fish. Never did a boy have more kinds of meat, morning,
noon, and night. The forest was full of game, the fish were just
standing up in the river and crying to be caught, and the air was
sometimes dark with wild fowl. Henry enjoyed it. He was always hungry.
Working and walking so much, and living in the open air every minute of
his life, except when he was eating or sleeping, his young and growing
frame demanded much nourishment, and it was not denied.

At last the great day came when he was allowed to kill a deer if he
could. Both Ross and Shif'less Sol had interceded for him. "The boy's
getting big and strong an' it's time he learned," said Ross. "His hand's
steady enough an' his eye's good enough already," said Shif'less Sol,
and his father agreeing with them told them to take him and teach him.

Two miles away, near the bank of the river, was a spring to which the
game often came to drink, and for this spring they started a little
while before sundown, Henry carrying his rifle on his shoulder, and his
heart fluttering. He felt his years increase suddenly and his figure
expand with equal abruptness. He had become a man and he was going forth
to slay big game. Yet despite his new manhood the blood would run to his
head and he felt his nerves trembling. He grasped his precious rifle
more firmly and stole a look out of the corner of his eye at its barrel
as it lay across his left shoulder. Though a smaller weapon it was
modeled after the famous Western rifle, which, with the ax, won the
wilderness. The stock was of hard maple wood delicately carved, and the
barrel was comparatively long, slender, and of blue steel. The sights
were as fine-drawn as a hair. When Henry stood the gun beside himself,
it was just as tall as he. He carried, too, a powderhorn, and the horn,
which was as white as snow, was scraped so thin as to be transparent,
thus enabling its owner to know just how much powder it contained,
without taking the trouble of pouring it out. His bullets and wadding he
carried in a small leather pouch by his side.

When they reached the spring the sun was still a half hour high and
filled the west with a red glow. The forest there was tinted by it, and
seen thus in the coming twilight with those weird crimsons and scarlets
showing through it, the wilderness looked very lonely and desolate. An
ordinary boy, at the coming of night would have been awed, if alone, by
the stillness of the great unknown spaces, but it found an answering
chord in Henry.

"Wind's blowin' from the west," said Sol, and so they went to the
eastern side of the spring, where they lay down beside a fallen log at a
fair distance. There was another log, much closer to the spring, but
Ross conferring aside with Sol chose the farther one. "We want to teach
the boy how to shoot an' be of some use to himself, not to slaughter,"
said Ross. Then the three remained there, a long time, and noiseless.
Henry was learning early one of the first great lessons of the forest,
which is silence. But he knew that he could have learned this lesson
alone. He already felt himself superior in some ways to Ross and Sol,
but he liked them too well to tell them so, or to affect even equality
in the lore of the wilderness.

The sun went down behind the Western forest, and the night came on,
heavy and dark. A light wind began to moan among the trees. Henry heard
the faint bubble of the water in the spring, and saw beside him the
forms of his two comrades. But they were so still that they might have
been dead. An hour passed and his eyes growing more used to the dimness,
he saw better. There was still nothing at the spring, but by and by Ross
put his hand gently upon his arm, and Henry, as if by instinct, looked
in the right direction. There at the far edge of the forest was a deer,
a noble stag, glancing warily about him.

The stag was a fine enough animal to Ross and Sol, but to Henry's
unaccustomed eyes he seemed gigantic, the mightiest of his kind that
ever walked the face of the earth.

The deer gazed cautiously, raising his great head, until his antlers
looked to Henry like the branching boughs of a tree. The wind was
blowing toward his hidden foes, and brought him no omen of coming
danger. He stepped into the open and again glanced around the circle. It
seemed to Henry that he was staring directly into the deer's eyes, and
could see the fire shining there.

"Aim at that spot there by the shoulder, when he stoops down to drink,"
said Ross in the lowest of tones.

Satisfied now that no enemy was near, the stag walked to the spring.
Then he began to lower slowly the great antlers, and his head approached
the water. Henry slipped the barrel of his rifle across the log and
looked down the sights. He was seized with a tremor, but Ross and
Shif'less Sol, with a magnanimity that did them credit, pretended not to
notice it. The boy soon mastered the feeling, but then, to his great
surprise, he was attacked by another emotion. Suddenly he began to have
pity, and a fellow-feeling for the stag. It, too, was in the great
wilderness, rejoicing in the woods and the grass and the running streams
and had done no harm. It seemed sad that so fine a life should end,
without warning and for so little.

The feeling was that of a young boy, the instinct of one who had not
learned to kill, and he suppressed it. Men had not yet thought to spare
the wild animals, or to consider them part of a great brotherhood, least
of all on the border, where the killing of game was a necessity. And so
Henry, after a moment's hesitation, the cause of which he himself
scarcely knew, picked the spot near the shoulder that Ross had
mentioned, and pulled the trigger.

The stag stood for a moment or two as if dazed, then leaped into the air
and ran to the edge of the woods, where he pitched down head foremost.
His body quivered for a little while and then lay still.

Henry was proud of his marksmanship, but he felt some remorse, too, when
he looked upon his victim. Yet he was eager to tell his father and his
young sister and brother of his success. They took off the pelt and cut
up the deer. A part of the haunch Henry ate for dinner and the antlers
were fastened over the fireplace, as the first important hunting trophy
won by the eldest son of the house.

Henry did not boast much of his triumph, although he noticed with secret
pride the awe of the children. His best friend, Paul Cotter, openly
expressed his admiration, but Braxton Wyatt, a boy of his own age, whom
he did not like, sneered and counted it as nothing. He even cast doubt
upon the reality of the deed, intimating that perhaps Ross or Sol had
fired the shot, and had allowed Henry to claim the credit.

Henry now felt incessantly the longing for the wilderness, but, for the
present, he helped his father furnish their house. It was too late to
plant crops that year, nor were the qualities of the soil yet altogether
known. It was rich beyond a doubt, but they could learn only by trial
what sort of seed suited it best. So they let that wait a while, and
continued the work of making themselves tight and warm for the winter.

The skins of deer and buffalo and beaver, slain by the hunters, were
dried in the sun, and they hung some of the finer ones on the walls of
the rooms to make them look more cozy and picturesque. Mrs. Ware also
put two or three on the floors, though the border women generally
scorned them for such uses, thinking them in the way. Henry also helped
his father make stools and chairs, the former a very simple task,
consisting of a flat piece of wood, chopped or sawed out, in which three
holes were bored to receive the legs, the latter made of a section of
sapling, an inch or so in diameter. But the baskets required longer and
more tedious work. They cut green withes, split them into strips and
then plaiting them together formed the basket. In this Mrs. Ware and
even the little girl helped. They also made tables and a small stone
furnace or bake-oven for the kitchen.

Their chief room now looked very cozy. In one corner stood a bedstead
with low, square posts, the bed covered with a pure white counterpane.
At the foot of the bedstead was a large heavy chest, which served as
bureau, sofa and dressing case. In the center of the room stood a big
walnut table, on the top of which rested a nest of wooden trays,
flanked, on one side, by a nicely folded tablecloth, and on the other by
a butcher knife and a Bible. In a corner was a cupboard consisting of a
set of shelves set into the logs, and on these shelves were the
blue-edged plates and yellow-figured teacups and blue teapot that Mrs.
Ware had received long ago from her mother. The furniture in the
remainder of the house followed this pattern.

The heaviest labor of all was to extend the "clearing"; that is, to cut
down trees and get the ground ready for planting the crops next spring,
and in this Henry helped, for he was able to wield an ax blow for blow
with a grown man. When he did not have to work he went often to the
river, which was within sight of Wareville, and caught fish. Nobody
except the men, who were always armed, and who knew how to take care of
themselves, was allowed to go more than a mile from the palisade, but
Henry was trusted as far as the river; then the watchman in the lookout
on top of the highest blockhouse could see him or any who might come,
and there, too, he often lingered.

He did not hate his work, yet he could not say that he liked it, and,
although he did not know it, the love of the wild man's ways was
creeping into his blood. The influence of the great forests, of the vast
unknown spaces, was upon him. He could lie peacefully in the shade of a
tree for an hour at a time, dreaming of rivers and mountains farther on
in the depths of the wilderness. He felt a kinship with the wild things,
and once as he lay perfectly still with his eyes almost closed, a stag,
perhaps the brother to the one that he had killed, came and looked at
him out of great soft eyes. It did not seem odd at the time to Henry
that the stag should do so; he took it then as a friendly act, and lest
he should alarm this new comrade of the woods he did not stir or even
raise his eyelids. The stag gazed at him a few moments, and then,
tossing his great antlers, turned and walked off in a graceful and
dignified way through the woods. Henry wondered where the deer would go,
and if it would be far. He wished that he, too, could roam the
wilderness so lightly, wandering where he wished, having no cares and
beholding new scenes every day. That would be a life worth living.

The next morning his mother said to his father:

"John, the boy is growing wild."

"Yes," replied the father. "They say it often happens with those who are
taken young into the wilderness. The forest lays a spell upon them when
they are easy to receive impressions."

The mother looked troubled, but Mr. Ware laughed.

"Don't bother about it," he said. "It can be cured. We have merely to
teach him the sense of responsibility."

This they proceeded to do.




CHAPTER III

LOST IN THE WILDERNESS


The method by which Mr. and Mrs. Ware undertook to teach Henry a sense
of responsibility was an increase of work. Founding a new state was no
light matter, and he must do his share. Since he loved to fish, it
became his duty to supply the table with fish, and that, too, at regular
hours, and he also began to think of traps and snares, which he would
set in the autumn for game. It was always wise for the pioneer to save
his powder and lead, the most valuable of his possessions and the
hardest to obtain. Any food that could be procured without its use was a
welcome addition.

But fishing remained his easiest task, and he did it all with a pole
that he cut with his clasp knife, a string and a little piece of bent
and stiffened wire. He caught perch, bass, suckers, trout, sunfish,
catfish, and other kinds, the names of which he did not know. Sometimes
when his hook and line had brought him all that was needed, and the day
was hot, he would take off his clothing and plunge into the deep, cool
pools. Often his friend, Paul Cotter, was with him. Paul was a year
younger than Henry, and not so big. Hence the larger boy felt himself,
in a certain sense, Paul's teacher and protector, which gave him a
comfortable feeling, and a desire to help his comrade as much as he
could.

He taught the smaller lad new tricks in swimming, and scarcely a day
passed when two sunburned, barefooted boys did not go to the river,
quickly throw off their clothing, and jump into the clear water. There
they swam and floated for a long time, dived, and ducked each other, and
then lay on the grass in the sun until they dried.

"Paul," said Henry once, as they were stretched thus on the bank,
"wouldn't you like to have nothing to do, but wander through the woods
just as you pleased, sleep wherever you wished, and kill game when you
grew hungry, just like the Indians?"

Henry's eyes were on the black line of the forest, and the blue haze of
the sky beyond. His spirit was away in the depths of the unknown.

"I don't know," replied Paul. "I guess a white boy has to become a white
man, after a while, and they say that the difference between a white man
and the Indian is that the white man has to work."

"But the Indians get along without it," said Henry.

"No they don't," replied Paul. "We win all the country because we've
learned how to do things while we are working."

Yet Henry was unconvinced, and his thoughts wandered far into the black
forest and the blue haze.

The cattle pastured near the deepest of the swimming holes, and it often
fell to the lot of the boys to bring them into the palisade at sunset.
This was a duty of no little importance, because if any of the cattle
wandered away into the forest and were lost, they could not be replaced.
It was now the latter half of summer, and the grass and foliage were
fast turning brown in the heat. Late on the afternoon of one of the very
hottest days Henry and Paul went to the deepest swimming hole. There had
not been a breath of air stirring since morning; not a blade of grass,
not a leaf quivered. The skies burned like a sheet of copper.

The boys panted, and their clothing, wet with perspiration, clung to
them. The earth was hot under their feet. Quickly they threw off their
garments and sprang into the water. How cool and grateful it felt! There
they lingered long, and did not notice the sudden obscurity of the sun
and darkening of the southwest.

A slight wind sprang up presently, and the dry leaves and grass began to
rustle. There was thunder in the distance and a stroke of lightning. The
boys were aroused, and scrambling out of the water put on their
clothing.

"A storm's coming," said Henry, who was weatherwise, "and we must get
the cattle in."

These sons of the forest did not fear rain, but they hurried on their
clothing, and they noticed, too, how rapidly the storm was gathering.
The heat had been great for days, and the earth was parched and thirsty.
The men had talked in the evening of rain, and said how welcome it would
be, and now the boys shared the general feeling. The drought would be
ended. The thirsty earth would drink deep and grow green again.

The rolling clouds, drawn like a great curtain over the southwest,
advanced and covered all the heavens. The flashes of lightning followed
each other so fast that, at times, they seemed continuous; the forest
groaned as it bent before the wind. Then the great drops fell, and soon
they were beating the earth like volleys of pistol bullets. Fragments of
boughs, stripped off by the wind, swept by. Never had the boys in their
Eastern home known such thunder and lightning. The roar of one was
always in their ears, and the flash of the other always in their eyes.

The frightened cattle were gathered into a group, pressing close
together for company and protection. The boys hurried them toward the
stockade, but one cow, driven by terror, broke from the rest and ran
toward the woods. Agile Henry, not willing to lose a single straggler,
pursued the fugitive, and Paul, wishing to be as zealous, followed. The
rest of the cattle, being so near and obeying the force of habit, went
on into the stockade.

It was the wildest cow of the herd that made a plunge for the woods, and
Henry, knowing her nature, expected trouble. So he ran as fast as he
could, and he was not aware until they were in the forest that Paul was
close behind him. Then he shouted:

"Go back, Paul! I'll bring her in."

But Paul would not turn. There was fire in his blood. He considered it
as much his duty to help as it was Henry's. Moreover, he would not
desert his comrade.

The fugitive, driven by the storm acting upon its wild nature, continued
at great speed, and the panting boys were not able to overtake her. So
on the trio went, plunging through the woods, and saving themselves from
falls, or collisions with trees, only by the light from the flashes of
lightning. Many boys, even on the border, would have turned back, but
there was something tenacious in Henry's nature; he had undertaken to do
a thing, and he did not wish to give it up. Besides that cow was too
valuable. And Paul would not leave his comrade.

Away the cow went, and behind her ran her pursuers. The rain came
rushing and roaring through the woods, falling now in sheets, while
overhead the lightning still burned, and the thunder still crashed,
though with less frequency. Both the boys were drenched, but they did
not mind it; they did not even know it at the time. The lightning died
presently, the thunder ceased to rumble, and then the darkness fell like
a great blanket over the whole forest. The chase was blotted out from
them, and the two boys, stopping, grasped each other's hands for the
sake of company. They could not see twenty feet before them, but the
rain still poured.

"We'll have to give her up," said Henry reluctantly. "We couldn't follow
a whole herd of buffaloes in all this black night."

"Maybe we can find her to-morrow," said Paul.

"Maybe so," replied Henry. "We've got to wait anyhow. Let's go home."

They started back for Wareville, keeping close together, lest they lose
each other in the darkness, and they realized suddenly that they were
uncomfortable. The rain was coming in such sheets directly in their
faces that it half blinded them, now and then their feet sank deep in
mire and their drenched bodies began to grow cold. The little log houses
in which they lived now seemed to them palaces, fit for a king, and they
hastened their footsteps, often tripping on vines or running into
bushes. But Henry was trying to see through the dark woods.

"We ought to be near the clearing," he said.

They stopped and looked all about, seeking to see a light. They knew
that one would be shining from the tower of the blockhouse as a guide to
them. But they saw none. They had misjudged the distance, so they
thought, and they pushed on a half hour longer, but there was still no
light, nor did they come to a clearing. Then they paused. Dark as it was
each saw a look of dismay on the face of the other.

"We've come the wrong way!" exclaimed Paul.

"Maybe we have," reluctantly admitted Henry.

But their dismay lasted only a little while. They were strong boys, used
to the wilderness, and they did not fear even darkness and wandering
through the woods. Moreover, they were sure that they should find
Wareville long before midnight.

They changed their course and continued the search. The rain ceased by
and by, the clouds left the heavens, and the moon came out, but they saw
nothing familiar about them. The great woods were dripping with water,
and it was the only sound they heard, besides that made by themselves.
They stopped again, worn out and disconsolate at last. All their walking
only served to confuse them the more. Neither now had any idea of the
direction in which Wareville lay, and to be lost in the wilderness was a
most desperate matter. They might travel a thousand miles, should
strength last them for so great a journey, and never see a single human
being. They leaned against the rough bark of a great oak tree, and
stared blankly at each other.

"What are we to do?" asked Paul.

"I can't say," replied Henry.

The two boys still looked blank, but at last they laughed--and each
laughed at the other's grewsome face. Then they began once more to cast
about them. The cold had passed and warm winds were blowing up from the
south. The forest was drying, and Henry and Paul, taking off their
coats, wrung the water from them. They were strong lads, inured to many
hardships of the border and the forest, and they did not fear ill
results from a mere wetting. Nevertheless, they wished to be
comfortable, and under the influence of the warm wind they soon found
themselves dry again. But they were so intensely sleepy that they could
scarcely keep their eyes open, and now the wilderness training of both
came into use.

It was a hilly country, with many outcroppings of stone and cavelike
openings in the sides of the steep but low hills, and such a place as
this the boys now sought. But it was a long hunt and they grew more
tired and sleepy at every step. They were hungry, too, but if they might
only sleep they could forget that. They heard again the hooting of owls
and the wind, moaning among the leaves, made strange noises. Once there
was a crash in a thicket beside them, and they jumped in momentary
alarm, but it was only a startled deer, far more scared than they,
running through the bushes, and Henry was ashamed of his nervous
impulse.

They found at last their resting place, a sheltered ledge of dry stone
in the hollow of a hill. The stone arched above them, and it was dark in
the recess, but the boys were too tired now to worry about shadows. They
crept into the hollow, and, scraping up fallen leaves to soften the hard
stone, lay down. Both were off to slumberland in less than five minutes.

The hollow faced the East, and the bright sun, shining into their eyes,
awakened them at last. 