Transcriber's Notes: Words in italics in the original are surrounded
with _underscores_. Characters superscripted in the original are
surrounded by {braces}. Ellipses match the original. In footnotes and
attributions, commas and periods seem to be used interchangeably. They
remain as printed. Variations in spelling, hyphenation, and accents
remain as in the original unless noted. A complete list of corrections
as well as other notes follows the text.




                              SHAKSPEARE

                                  AND

                              HIS TIMES:

                               INCLUDING
                      THE BIOGRAPHY OF THE POET;
 CRITICISMS ON HIS GENIUS AND WRITINGS; A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF HIS PLAYS;
             A DISQUISITION ON THE OBJECT OF HIS SONNETS;
                                  AND
                             A HISTORY OF
         _THE MANNERS, CUSTOMS, AND AMUSEMENTS, SUPERSTITIONS,
              POETRY, AND ELEGANT LITERATURE OF HIS AGE_.

                         BY NATHAN DRAKE, M.D.
 AUTHOR OF "LITERARY HOURS," AND OF "ESSAYS ON PERIODICAL LITERATURE."


    —— On the tip of his subduing tongue
    All kind of arguments and question deep,
    All replication prompt, and reason strong,
    For his advantage still did wake and sleep:
    To make the weeper laugh, the laugher weep,
    He had the dialect and different skill,
    Catching all passions in his craft of will;
    That he did in the general bosom reign
    Of young, of old; and sexes both enchanted.

    The very age and body of the time, his form and pressure.
                                                 SHAKSPEARE.


                           _IN TWO VOLUMES._

                               VOL. II.

                                LONDON:
          PRINTED FOR T. CADELL AND W. DAVIES, IN THE STRAND.
                                 1817.




                        Printed by A. Strahan,
                       Printers-Street, London.




CONTENTS

OF

_THE SECOND VOLUME_.


  PART II. _continued_.

  SHAKSPEARE IN LONDON.


  CHAP. V.

    Dedications of Shakspeare's VENUS AND ADONIS, and RAPE OF
      LUCRECE, to the Earl of Southampton — Biographical Sketch
      of the Earl — Critique on the Poems of Shakspeare.
                                                         _Page_ 1


  CHAP. VI.

    On the Dress and Modes of Living, and the Manners and Customs
      of the Inhabitants of the Metropolis, during the Age of
      Shakspeare.                                              87


  CHAP. VII.

    On the Diversions of the Metropolis, and the Court — The
      _Stage_; its Usages and Economy.                        168


  CHAP. VIII.

    A Brief View of Dramatic Poetry, from the Birth of Shakspeare
      to the Period of his Commencement as a Writer for the
      Stage, about the Year 1590; with Critical Notices of the
      Dramatic Poets who flourished during that Interval.     227


  CHAP. IX.

    Period of Shakspeare's Commencement as a Dramatic Poet —
      Chronological Arrangement of his genuine Plays —
      Observations on PERICLES; on the COMEDY OF ERRORS; on
      LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST; on HENRY THE SIXTH, PART THE FIRST;
      on HENRY THE SIXTH, PART THE SECOND; and on A
      MIDSUMMER-NIGHT'S DREAM — Dissertation on the FAIRY
      MYTHOLOGY, and on the Modifications which it received from
      the Genius of Shakspeare.                               256


  CHAP. X.

    Observations on ROMEO AND JULIET; on the TAMING OF THE SHREW;
      on THE TWO GENTLEMEN OF VERONA; on KING RICHARD THE THIRD;
      on KING RICHARD THE SECOND; on KING HENRY THE FOURTH, PARTS
      FIRST AND SECOND; on THE MERCHANT OF VENICE; and on HAMLET
      — Dissertation on the AGENCY of SPIRITS and APPARITIONS,
      and on the GHOST in HAMLET.                             356


  CHAP. XI.

    Observations on KING JOHN; on ALL'S WELL THAT ENDS WELL; on
      KING HENRY THE FIFTH; on MUCH ADO ABOUT NOTHING; on AS YOU
      LIKE IT; on MERRY WIVES OF WINDSOR; on TROILUS AND
      CRESSIDA; on HENRY THE EIGHTH; on TIMON OF ATHENS; on
      MEASURE FOR MEASURE; on KING LEAR; on CYMBELINE; on MACBETH
      — Dissertation on the POPULAR BELIEF in WITCHCRAFT during
      the Age of Shakspeare, and on his Management of this
      Superstition in the Tragedy of MACBETH.                 419


  CHAP. XII.

    Observations on JULIUS CÆSAR; on ANTONY AND CLEOPATRA; on
      CORIOLANUS; on THE WINTER'S TALE; on THE TEMPEST —
      Dissertation on the GENERAL BELIEF of the Times in the ART
      OF MAGIC, and on Shakspeare's Management of this
      Superstition as exhibited in THE TEMPEST — Observations on
      OTHELLO; on TWELFTH NIGHT, and on the PLAYS ASCRIBED to
      Shakspeare — SUMMARY OF SHAKSPEARE'S DRAMATIC CHARACTER.
                                                              490


  CHAP. XIII.

    A Brief View of Dramatic Poetry, and its Cultivators, during
      Shakspeare's Connection with the Stage.                 556


  CHAP. XIV.

    The Biography of Shakspeare continued to the Close of his
      Residence in London.                                    581


  PART III.

  SHAKSPEARE IN RETIREMENT.


  CHAP. I.

    Anecdotes relative to Shakspeare during his Retirement at
      Stratford.                                              603


  CHAP. II.

    The Death of Shakspeare — Observations on his Will — On the
      Disposition and Moral Character of Shakspeare — On the
      Monument erected to his Memory, and on the Engraving of him
      prefixed to the first Folio Edition of his Plays —
      Conclusion.                                             611


  APPENDIX.                                                   625




SHAKSPEARE AND HIS TIMES.




PART II.

_SHAKSPEARE IN LONDON._




CHAPTER V.

    DEDICATIONS OF SHAKSPEARE'S VENUS AND ADONIS AND RAPE OF
    LUCRECE TO THE EARL OF SOUTHAMPTON—BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH OF THE
    EARL—CRITIQUE ON THE POEMS OF SHAKSPEARE.


Shakspeare's dedication of his _Venus and Adonis_ to the Earl of
Southampton, in 1593; the accomplishments, the liberality, and the
virtues of this amiable nobleman, and the substantial patronage which,
according to tradition, he bestowed upon our poet, together claim for
him, in this place, a more than cursory notice as to life and character.

_Thomas Wriothesly_, Earl of Southampton, and Baron of Titchfield, was
born on the sixth of October, 1573. His grandfather had been created
an Earl in the reign of Henry the Eighth; and his father, who married
Mary, the daughter of Anthony, first Viscount of Montague, was a
strenuous supporter of the rights of Mary Queen of Scots. Just previous
to the completion of his eighth year, he suffered an irreparable loss
by the death of his father, on the 4th of October, 1581. His mother,
however, appears to have been by no means negligent of his education;
for he was early sent to Cambridge, being matriculated there when
only twelve years old, on the 11th of December, 1585. He was admitted
of St. John's College, where, on the 6th of June, 1589, he took his
degree of Master of Arts, and, after a residence of nearly five years
in the University, he finally left it for Town, to complete his course
of studies at Gray's Inn, of which place, in June, 1590, he had entered
himself a member.

The circumstances which, so shortly after Lord Southampton's arrival in
London, induced Shakspeare to select him as his patron, may, with an
assurance almost amounting to certainty, be ascribed to the following
event. Not long after the death of her husband, Lady Southampton
married Sir Thomas Heneage, treasurer of the chamber, an office which
necessarily led him into connection with actors and dramatic writers.
Of this intercourse Lord Southampton, at the age of seventeen, was
very willing to avail himself, and his subsequent history evinces,
that, throughout life, he retained a passionate attachment to dramatic
exhibitions. No stronger proof, indeed, can be given of his love for
the theatre, than what an anecdote related by Rowland Whyte affords
us, who, in a letter to Sir Robert Sydney, dated October 11th, 1599,
tells his correspondent, that "my Lord Southampton and Lord Rutland
come not to the Court (at Nonesuch). The one doth but very seldome.
They pass away the tyme in London _merely in going to plaies EVERY
DAY_."[2:A]

To a young nobleman thus inclined, imbued with a keen relish for
dramatic poetry, who was ardent in his thirst for fame, and liberal in
the encouragement of genius, it was natural for our poet to look not
only with hope and expectation, but with enthusiastic regard. To Lord
Southampton, therefore, though only nineteen years old, Shakspeare,
in his twenty-ninth year[2:B], dedicated his _Venus and Adonis_, "the
first heire of _his_ invention."

The language of this dedication, however, indicates some degree of
apprehension as to the nature of its reception, and consequently proves
that our author was not at this period assured of His Lordship's
support; for it commences thus:—"Right Honorable, I know not how I
shall _offend_ in dedicating my unpolisht lines to your Lordship;" and
he adds in the opening of the next clause, "onely if your Honor _seeme
but pleased_, I account myselfe highly praised." These timidities
appear to have vanished in a very short period: for our author's
dedication to the same nobleman of his _Rape of Lucrece_, which was
entered on the Stationers' Books on May 9th, 1594, and published almost
immediately afterwards, speaks a very different language, and indicates
very plainly that Shakspeare had already experienced the beneficial
effects of His Lordship's patronage. Gratitude and confidence, indeed,
cannot express themselves in clearer terms than may be found in the
diction of this address:—"The _love_ I dedicate to Your Lordship,"
says the bard, "_is without end_.—The _warrant_ I have of _your
Honourable disposition_, not the worth of my untutored lines, makes
it _assured of acceptance_. What I have done is yours, what I have
to doe is yours, being part _in all I have devoted yours_. Were my
worth greater, my duety would shew greater; meane time, as it is, _it
is bound to your Lordship_." Words more declaratory of obligation it
would not be easy to select, and we shall be justified, therefore, in
inferring, that Lord Southampton had conferred upon Shakspeare, in
consequence of his dedication to him of _Venus and Adonis_, some marked
proof of his kindness and protection.

Tradition has recorded, among other instances of this nobleman's
pecuniary bounty, that he, at one time, gave Shakspeare a thousand
pounds, in order to complete a purchase, a sum which in these
days would be equal in value to more than five times its original
amount.[3:A] This may be, and probably is, an exaggeration; but that
it has been founded on the _well-known_ liberality of Lord Southampton
to Shakspeare; on a certain knowledge that donations had passed from
the peer to the poet, there can be little doubt. It had become the
custom of the age to reward dedication by pecuniary bounty, and that
Lord Southampton was diffusively and peculiarly generous in this
mode of remuneration, we have the express testimony of Florio, who,
dedicating his _World of Words_ to this nobleman in 1598, says:—"In
truth, I acknowledge an entire debt, not only of my best knowledge, but
of all; yea of more than I know, or can to your bounteous lordship,
_in whose pay and patronage I have lived some years_; to whom I owe
and vowe the years I have to live. But, as to me, _and many more_, the
glorious and gracious sunshine of your honour hath infused light and
life." Here, if we except the direct confession relative to "_pay_,"
the language is similar to, and not more emphatically expressive of
gratitude than was Shakspeare's; and that, under the phrase "_many
more_," Florio meant to include our poet, we may, without scruple,
infer. To an actor, to a rising dramatic writer, to one who had placed
the first fruits of his genius under his protection, and who was still
contending with the difficulties incident to his situation, the taste,
the generosity, and the feeling of Lord Southampton, would naturally
be attracted; and the donation which, in all probability, followed
the dedication of _Venus and Adonis_, we have reason, from the voice
of tradition, to conclude, was succeeded by many, and still more
important, proofs of His Lordship's favour.

The patronage of literature, however, was not the only inclination
which, at this early period of life, His Lordship cultivated with
enthusiasm; the year subsequent to his receival of Shakspeare's
dedication of _The Rape of Lucrece_, saw him entangled in all the
perplexities of love, and the devoted slave _of the faire Mrs.
Varnon_. Of this attachment, which was thwarted by the caprice of
Elizabeth, Rowland Whyte, in a letter to Sir Henry Sydney, dated
September 23rd, 1595, writes in the following terms:—"My Lord
Southampton doth with too much familiarity court the faire Mrs. Varnon,
while his friends, observing the Queen's humours towards my Lord of
Essex, do what they can to bring her to favour him; but it is yet in
vain."[5:A] This young lady, Elizabeth Vernon, was the cousin of the
celebrated Earl of Essex, between whom and Southampton differences
had arisen, which this passion for his fair relative dissipated for
ever.[5:B]

Yet the fascinations of love could not long restrain the ardent spirit
of Lord Southampton. In 1597, when Lord Essex was appointed General
of the forces destined to act against the Azores, Southampton, at the
age of twenty-four, gallantly came forward as a volunteer, on board
the Garland, one of Her Majesty's best ships,—an offer which was soon
followed by a commission from Essex to command her. An opportunity
speedily occurred for the display of his courage; in an engagement
with the Spanish fleet, he pursued and sunk one of the enemy's largest
men of war, and was wounded in the arm, during the conflict.[5:C]
Sir William Monson, one of the Admirals of the expedition, tells us,
that the Earl lost time in this chase, which might have been better
employed[5:D]; but his friend Essex appears to have considered his
conduct in a different light, and conferred upon him, during his
voyage, the honour of knighthood.

On his return to England, in October, 1597, he had the misfortune to
find that the Queen had embraced the opinion of Monson, rather than
that of Essex, and frowned with displeasure on the officer who had
presumed to pursue and sink a Spanish vessel, without orders from his
commander; a censure which was intended also to reach the General, with
whom she was justly offended for having assumed the direction of a
service to which his judgment and his talents were inadequate.

Nor was the immediately subsequent conduct of Southampton in the
least degree calculated to appease the anger of Elizabeth; he renewed
his proposals of marriage, and again without consulting her wishes;
he quarrelled with, and challenged the Earl of Northumberland, and
compelled her to issue a mandate in order to prevent their meeting;
and one evening, being engaged at play, in the presence-chamber, with
Raleigh and some other courtiers, they protracted their amusement
beyond the hour of the Queen's retirement to rest; and being warned
by Willoughby, the officer in waiting, to depart, Raleigh obeyed, but
Southampton, indignant and easily irritated, refused compliance, and,
warm language ensuing, he struck Willoughby, who was not backward in
returning the blow. When the Queen, the next morning, was apprised of
this disgraceful scuffle, she applauded Willoughby for his spirited
conduct, adding, that "he had better have sent Southampton to the
porter's lodge, to see who durst have fetched him out."[6:A]

This heedless and intemperate ebullition of passion, the result of
youth and inexperience, was atoned for by many sterling virtues of
the head and heart; and the career of dissipation was fortunately
interrupted by His Lordship's attention to his duty as a senator in the
first place, and, secondly, by an engagement to accompany Mr. Secretary
Cecil on an embassy to Paris. His introduction to parliamentary
business began on the 24th of October, 1597, and terminated, with the
session, on the 8th of February 1598; and two days afterwards, he left
London to commence his tour.

Previous to his quitting the capital, he, and his friends, Cobham and
Raleigh, thought it necessary to entertain his future fellow-traveller;
and, on this occasion, Southampton had recourse to his favourite
amusement, the drama; for it is recorded that they "severally
feasted Mr. Secretary, before his departure; and had _plaies_, and
banquets."[7:A] The bare mention of this excursion, however, had
afforded extreme grief to the fair object of his affections, who
"passed her time in weeping[7:B];" and, in order to obviate the
apprehended consequences of his absence, and consequently her sorrow,
it had been secretly proposed that Lord Southampton should marry his
mistress before his departure.[7:C] Circumstances having prevented the
accomplishment of this plan, we are not surprised to learn that when
His Lordship departed, on the 10th of February 1598, he left "behind
him a most desolate gentlewoman, that almost wept out her fairest
eyes."[7:D]

The travellers reached Paris on the 1st of March 1598, and on the
17th of the same month, Cecil introduced his friend, at Angers, to
that illustrious monarch Henry the Fourth, telling His Majesty, that
Lord Southampton "was come with deliberation to do him service."
Henry received the Earl most graciously, and embraced him with many
expressions of regard; and, had not the peace of Vervins intervened,
His Lordship would have ardently seized the opportunity of serving the
ensuing campaign under a general of such unrivalled reputation.

In the course of November 1598, there is reason to suppose that this
enterprising nobleman returned to London[7:E]; soon after which event,
his union with Elizabeth Vernon took place. His bride was the daughter
of John Vernon of Hodnet, in the county of Salop, and she appears to
have possessed a large share of personal charms. A portrait of her was
drawn by Cornelius Jansen, which is said to have "the face and hands
coloured with incomparable lustre."[8:A] The unjustifiable resentment
of the Queen, however, rendered this connection, for a time, a source
of much misery to both parties. Her capricious tyranny was such,
as to induce her to feel offended, if any of her courtiers had the
audacity to love or marry without her knowledge or permission; and the
result of what she termed His Lordship's clandestine marriage, was the
instant dismissal of himself and his lady to a prison. How long their
confinement was protracted, cannot now be accurately ascertained;
that it was long in the opinion of the Earl of Essex, appears from
an address of his to the Lords of Council, in which he puts the
following interrogation:—"Was it treason in my Lord of Southampton
to marry my poor kinswoman, that neither _long_ imprisonment, nor any
punishment besides, that hath been usual, in like cases, can satisfy,
or appease[8:B]?" But we do know that it could not have existed
beyond March, 1599; for on the 27th of that month, Lord Southampton
accompanied his friend Essex to Ireland, where, immediately on his
arrival, he was appointed by the Earl, now Lord Deputy of that country,
his general of the horse.

This military promotion of Southampton is one among numerous proofs
of the imprudence of Essex, for it was not only without the Queen's
knowledge, but, as Camden has informed us, "clean contrary to his
instructions."[8:C] What was naturally to be expected, therefore, soon
occurred; Lord Southampton was, by the Queen's orders, deprived of his
commission, in the August following, and on the 20th of September,
1599, he revisited London, where, apprehensive of the displeasure of
Her Majesty, he absented himself from court, and endeavoured to soothe
his inquietude by the attractions of the theatre, to which his ardent
admiration of the genius of Shakspeare now daily induced him to recur.

The resentment of the Queen, however, though not altogether appeased,
soon began to subside; and in December 1599, when Lord Mountjoy was
commissioned to supersede Essex in the Lord Lieutenancy of Ireland,
Lord Southampton was one of the officers selected by Her Majesty to
attend him. Farther than this she refused to condescend; for, though
His Lordship solicited for some weeks the honour of kissing her hand,
and was supported in this request by the influence of Cecil, he
solicited in vain, and was at length compelled to rest satisfied with
the expression of her wishes for the safety of his journey.

One unpleasant consequence of his former transient campaign in Ireland,
had been a quarrel with the Lord Grey, who acting under him as a
colonel of horse had, from the impetuosity of youthful valour, attacked
the rebel force without orders; a contempt of subordination which had
been punished by his superior with a night's imprisonment.[9:A] The
fiery spirit of Grey could not brook even this requisite attention to
discipline, and he sent Southampton a challenge, which the latter,
on his departure for Ireland, in April 1600, accepted, by declaring,
that he would meet Lord Grey in any part of that country. The Queen,
however, for the present arrested the combat; but the animosity was
imbittered by delay, and Lord Southampton felt it necessary to his
character to break off his military engagements, which had conferred
upon him the reputation of great bravery and professional skill, and
had received the marked approval of the Lord Deputy, to satiate the
resentment of Grey, who had again called him to a meeting, and fixed
its scene in the Low Countries.

Of this interview we know nothing more than that it proved so
completely abortive, that, shortly afterwards, Lord Grey attacked
Southampton as he rode through the streets of London, an outrage
which affords but a melancholy trait of the manners of the age, though
punished on the spot by the immediate committal of the perpetrator to
prison.

It had been happy, however, for the fame and repose of Southampton,
had this been the only unfortunate contest in which he engaged; but
he was recalled by Essex from the Low Countries, in order to assist
him in his insurrectionary movements against the person and government
of his sovereign. Blinded by the attachments of friendship, which he
cultivated with enthusiastic warmth, and indignant at the treatment
which he had lately received from the Queen, he too readily listened
to the treasonable suggestions of Essex, and became one of the
conspirators who assembled at the house of this nobleman on the 8th
of February 1601. Here they took the decisive step of imprisoning the
Queen's privy counsellors who had been sent to enquire into the purport
of their meeting, and from this mansion they sallied forth, with the
view of exciting the citizens to rebellion. An enterprise so criminal,
so rash, and chimerical, immediately met the fate which it merited;
and the trial of Essex and Southampton for high treason took place on
the 19th of February, when, both being found guilty, the former, as is
well known, expiated his offence by death, while the latter, from the
minor culpability of his views, from the modesty and contrition which
he exhibited in his defence, and from the intercession of Cecil and the
peers, obtained a remission of the sentence affecting his life, but was
condemned to imprisonment in the Tower.

We have more than once mentioned the great partiality of Lord
Southampton to dramatic literature, and it is somewhat remarkable
that this partiality should have been rendered subservient to the
machinations of treason; for Bacon tells us, that "the afternoon before
the rebellion, Merick, (afterwards the defender of Essex-house,) with
a great company of others, that afterwards were all in the action, had
procured to be played before them the play of deposing _King Richard
the Second_;—when it was told him by one of the players that the play
was _old_, and they should have loss in playing it, because few would
come to it, there were forty shillings extraordinary given to play
it, and so thereupon played it was."[11:A] It appears from the State
Trials, vol. vii. p. 60., that the player to whom the forty shillings
were given, was Augustine Philippes, one of the patentees of the Globe
playhouse with Shakspeare, in 1603.

The term _old_ applied to this play, which, according to the report of
the Queen, "was played forty times in open streets and houses[11:B],"
has induced Dr. Farmer and Mr. Tyrwhitt to conclude that a play
entitled _Richard the Second_, or _Henry the Fourth_, existed before
Shakspeare's dramas on these subjects. This position, however, is
dissented from by Mr. Chalmers, who says,—"In opposition to Farmer and
Tyrwhitt, I hold, though I have a great respect for their memories,
that it was illogical to argue, from a nonentity, against an entity;
that as no such play as the Henry IV. which they spoke of had ever
appeared, while Shakspeare's Richard II. was apparent to every eye,
it was inconsequential reasoning in them to prefer the first play to
the last: and I am, therefore, of opinion, that _the play of deposing
Richard_ II. which was seditiously played on the 7th of February
1600-1, was Shakspeare's Richard II., that had been originally acted in
1596, and first printed in 1597."[11:C]

This opinion of Mr. Chalmers will be much strengthened when we
reflect that Lord Southampton's well-known attachment to the muse
of Shakspeare, would almost certainly induce him to prefer the play
written by his favourite poet to the composition of an obscure, and,
without doubt, a very inferior writer.

The death of Elizabeth terminated the confinement and the sufferings of
Lord Southampton. No sooner had James acceded to the throne, than he
sent an order for his release from the Tower, which took place on the
10th of April, 1603, and accompanied it with a request that he would
meet him on his way to England. This might be considered as a certain
presage of future favours, and was, indeed, speedily followed, not only
by the reversal of his attainder, and the restoration of his property,
but by an accumulation of honours. He was immediately appointed master
of the game to the Queen; a pension of six hundred pounds per annum
was allotted to his lady; in July, 1603, he was installed a knight of
the garter, and created captain of Isle of Wight and of Carisbrooke
Castle, and in the following Spring he was constituted Lord Lieutenant
of Hampshire, and was chosen by the King as his companion in a journey
to Royston.

This flow of good fortune was, however, transiently impeded by the
jealousy of James, who, stimulated by the machinations of some of his
courtiers, envious of the returning prosperity of the Earl[12:A],
was led to suspect that an improper intimacy had taken place between
Southampton and his Queen; a charge of disaffection to His Majesty
was, therefore, brought against His Lordship, and he was apprehended
towards the close of June, 1604; but not the smallest proof of his
disloyalty having been substantiated, he was immediately released, and
as immediately retaken into favour.

Of his perfect reinstatement, indeed, in the affections of James we
possess a decided proof. Rowland Whyte, writing to Lord Shrewsbury, on
the 4th of March, 1604, says,—"My La. Southampton was brought to bed
of a young Lord upon St. David's Day (March 1st) in the morning; a St.
to be much honored by that howse for so great a blessing, by wearing
a leeke for ever upon that day."[12:B] Now this child was christened
at court on the 27th of the same month, "the King, and Lord Cranburn,
with the Countess of Suffolk, being gossips[13:A];" an honour which
was followed, in June, 1606, by a more substantial mark of regard, the
appointment of His Lordship to be Warden of the New Forest, and Keeper
of the Park of Lindhurst.

In November, 1607, Lord Southampton lost his mother, who had been wife
successively to Henry Wriothesly Earl of Southampton, to Sir Thomas
Heneage, and to Sir William Hervey. We are told by Lord Arundel that
she "lefte the _best of her stuffe to her sonne_, and the greatest
part to her husband[13:B]"; this bequest, however, could not have
been very ample, for it did not obviate the necessity of her son's
applying, shortly afterwards, to trade and colonisation with the view
of increasing his property. In 1609, he was constituted a member of
the first Virginia Company, took a most active part in their concerns,
and was the chief promoter of the different voyages to America, which
were undertaken as well for the purposes of discovery as for private
interest.

The warmth of temper which distinguished Lord Southampton in early
life, seems not to have been adequately repressed by time and
experience; he was ever prone to resentment, though not difficult to
conciliate, and, unhappily, the manners of the age were not such as
to impose due restraint on the tumultuary passions. A quarrel with
Lord Montgomery, on a trifling occasion, which occurred in April,
1610, is but too striking an illustration of these remarks; "they fell
out at tennis," relates Winwood, "where the rackets flew about their
ears, but the matter was compounded by the King, _without further
bloodshed_[13:C];" a passage, the close of which proves that they had
fought and wounded each other with the instruments of their amusement!

We speedily recognise Lord Southampton, however, acting in a manner
more suitable to his station and character; on the 4th of June, 1610,
he officiated as carver at the magnificent festival which was given
in honour of young Henry's assumption of the title of Prince of Wales;
and in July, 1613, we find His Lordship entertaining the King at his
house in the New Forest, whither he had returned from an expedition to
the continent, expressly for this purpose, and under the expectation of
receiving a royal visit. After discharging this duty to his sovereign,
he again left his native country, and was present, in the following
year, with Lord Herbert of Cherbury, at the siege of Rees, in the
dutchy of Cleve.

It was at this period that his reputation as a patron of literature,
attained its highest celebrity, and it is greatly to be desired that
tradition had enabled us to dwell more minutely on his intercourse
with the learned. His bounty to, and encouragement of, Shakspeare have
conferred immortality on his name; to Florio, we have seen, he extended
a durable and efficient support; Brathwayt, in his dedication of his
"Scholar's Medley," 1614, calls him "learnings best favourite;" and
in 1617, he contributed very liberally to relieve the distresses of
Minsheu, the author of "The Guide to Tongues." Doubtless, had we more
ample materials for his life, these had not been the only instances of
his munificence to literary talent.

Still further promotion awaited this accomplished nobleman. When James
visited Scotland, in 1617, he accompanied his sovereign, and rendered
himself so acceptable by his courtesy and care, that, on the 19th
of April, 1619, he was rewarded by the confidential situation of a
privy-counsellor, an honour which he had long anxiously held in view.

This completion of his wishes, however, was not attended with the
result which he had so sanguinely expected. He found himself unable,
from principle, to join in the measures of the court, and the
opposition which he now commenced against the King and his ministers,
had, in a mind so ardent, a natural tendency to excess. In 1620, and
the two following years, he was chosen, contrary to the wishes of
government, treasurer of the Virginia Company, an office of great
weight and responsibility, but to which his zeal and activity in
forwarding the views of that corporation gave him a just claim. Such,
indeed, was the sense which the company entertained of his merits, that
his name was annexed to several important parts of Virginia; as, for
instance, Southampton-hundred, Hampton-roads, &c.

Whilst he opposed the court merely in its commercial arrangements, no
personal inconvenience attended his exertions; but when, in the session
of parliament which took place towards the commencement of the year
1621, he deemed it necessary to withstand the unconstitutional views of
ministers, he immediately felt the arm of power. He had introduced with
success a motion against illegal patents; and during the sitting of the
14th of March, so sharp an altercation occurred between himself and the
Marquis of Buckingham, that the interference of the Prince of Wales was
necessary to appease the anger of the disputants.

This stormy discussion, and His Lordship's junction with the popular
party, occasioned so much suspicion on the part of government, that on
the 16th of June, twelve days after the prorogation of parliament, he
was committed to the custody of the Dean of Westminster; nor was it
until the 18th of the subsequent July, that he was permitted to return
to his house at Titchfield, under a partial restraint, nor until the
first of September, that he was entirely liberated.

Unawed, however, by this unmerited persecution, and supported by
a numerous and respectable party, justly offended at the King's
pusillanimity in tamely witnessing his son-in-law's deprivation of the
Palatinate, he came forward, with augmented activity, in the parliament
of 1624, which opened on the 9th of February. Here he sat on several
committees; and when James, on the 5th of the June following, found
himself compelled to relinquish his pacific system, and to enter into a
treaty with the States-General, granting them permission to raise four
regiments in this country, he, unfortunately for himself and his son,
procured the colonelcy of one of them.[15:A]

Being under the necessity of taking up their winter-quarters at
Rosendale in Holland, the Earl, and his eldest son Lord Wriothesly,
were seized with a burning fever; "the violence of which distemper,"
says Wilson, "wrought most vigorously upon the heat of youth,
overcoming the son first, and the drooping father, having overcome the
fever, departed from Rosendale with an intention to bring his sons body
to England; but at Bergen-op-zoom he died of a lethargy in the view
and presence of the _Relator_, and were both in one small bark brought
to Southampton."[16:A] The son expired on the 5th of November, and his
parent on the tenth, and they were both buried in the sepulchre of
their fathers at Titchfield, on Innocents' day, 1624.

Thus perished, in the fifty-second year of his age, Henry Earl of
Southampton, leaving a widow, and three daughters, who, from a letter
preserved in the Cabala, appear to have been in confined circumstances;
this epistle is from the Lord Keeper Williams to the Duke of
Buckingham, dated Nov. 7th, 1624, and requesting of that nobleman "his
grace and goodness towards the most distressed widow and children of my
Lord Southampton."[16:B]

If we except a constitutional warmth and irritability of temper, and
their too common result, an occasional error of judgment, there did not
exist, throughout the reigns of Elizabeth and James, a character more
truly amiable, great, and good than was that of Lord Southampton. To
have secured, indeed, the reverence and affection of Shakspeare, was
of itself a sufficient passport to the purest fame; but the love and
admiration which attended him was general. As a soldier, he was brave,
open, and magnanimous; as a statesman remarkable for integrity and
independence of mind, and perhaps no individual of his age was a more
enthusiastic lover, or a more munificent patron, of arts and literature.

The virtues of his private life, as well as these features of his
public character, rest upon the authority of those who best knew
him. To the "noble" and "honourable disposition," ascribed to him by
Shakspeare, who affectionately declares, that he loves him "without
end," we can add the respectable testimony of Chapman, Sir John
Beaumont, and Wither, all intimately acquainted with him, and the
second his particular friend.

Chapman, in one of his dedicatory sonnets, prefixed to his version of
the Iliad, not only applies to him the epithet "learned," but declares
him to be the "choice of all our country's noblest spirits[17:A];" and
Beaumont, in an Elegy on his death, tells us that his ambition was to
draw

    "A picture fit for this my noble friend,
     That his dear name may not in silence die."

In a beautiful strain of enthusiasm, he informs us, that his verses are
calculated for posterity, and

    ——————————— "not for the present age;
    For what man lives, or breathes on England's stage,
    That knew not brave Southampton, in whose sight
    Most plac'd their day, and in his absence night?"

He then proceeds to sketch his character at the different periods of
his life:—

    "When he was young, no ornament of youth
     Was wanting in him;"

and, in manhood, he shone

    "As best in martial deedes and courtly sports;"

until riper age, and the cares of the world, having begun to shade his
head with silver hairs,

    "His valiant fervour was not then decaide,
     But joyn'd with counsell, as a further aide."

After this eulogium on the more ostensible features of his life, which
terminates with the assertion, that

    "No pow'r, no strong persuasion could him draw
     From that, which he conceiv'd as right and law,"

he presents a most pleasing delineation of his domestic conduct and
enjoyments:—

    "When shall we in this realme a father finde
     So truly sweet, or husband halfe so kinde?
     Thus he enjoyde the best contents of life,
     Obedient children, and a loving wife:
     These were his parts in peace:"

and concludes with celebrating his love of letters and of literary
men:—

    "I keepe that glory last, which is the best,
     The love of learning, which he oft exprest
     By conversation, and respect to those
     Who had a name in artes, in verse or prose."[19:A]

Wither seems to have been equally impressed with the estimable
character of Lord Southampton, and to have meditated a record of his
life and virtues; for, in an epigram addressed to him, with a copy of
his "Abuses Stript and Whipt," he exclaims,

    "I ought to be no stranger to thy worth,
     Nor let thy virtues in oblivion sleep:
     Nor will I, if my fortunes give me time."[19:B]

In short, to adopt the language of an enthusiastic admirer of our
dramatic bard, "Southampton died as he had lived, with a mind
untainted: embalmed with the tears of every friend to virtue, and to
splendid accomplishments: all who knew him, _wished to him long life,
still lengthened with all happiness_."[19:C]

That a nobleman so highly gifted, most amiable by his virtues, and most
respectable by his talents and his taste, should have been strongly
attached to Shakspeare, and this attachment returned by the poet with
equal fervour, cannot excite much surprise; indeed, that more than
pecuniary obligation was the tie that connected Shakspeare with his
patron, must appear from the tone of his dedications, especially from
that prefixed to the "Rape of Lucrece," which breathes an air of
affectionate friendship, and respectful familiarity.[20:A] We should
also recollect, that, according to tradition, the great pecuniary
obligation of Shakspeare to his patron, was much posterior to the
period of these dedications, being given for the purpose of enabling
the poet to make a purchase at his native town of Stratford, a short
time previous to his retirement thither.

It may, therefore, with safety be concluded, that admiration and esteem
were the chief motives which actuated Shakspeare in all the stages of
his intercourse with Lord Southampton, to whom, in 1593, we have found
he dedicated the "first heir of his invention."

Our reasons for believing that this poem was written in the interval
which occurred between the years 1587 and 1590, have been already given
in a former part of the work[20:B], and we shall here, therefore,
only transcribe the title page of the original edition, which, though
entered in the Stationers' books by Richard Field, on the 18th of
April, 1593, was supposed not to have been published before 1594, until
Mr. Malone had the good fortune to procure a copy from a provincial
catalogue, perhaps the only one remaining in existence[20:C]:—


"VENUS AND ADONIS.

    Vilia miretur Vulgus, mihi flavus Apollo,
    Pocula Castalia plena ministret aqua.

London. By Richard Field, and are to be solde at the Signe of the White
Greyhound, in Paules Church Yard. 1593."

This, the earliest offspring of our poet's prolific genius, consists
of one hundred and ninety-nine stanzas, each stanza including six
lines, of which the first four are in alternate rhime, and the fifth
and sixth form a couplet. Its length, indeed, is one of its principal
defects; for it has led, not only to a fatiguing circumlocution, in
point of language, but it has occasioned the poet frequently to expand
his imagery into a diffuseness which sometimes destroys its effect;
and often to indulge in a strain of reflection more remarkable for its
subtlety of conceit, than for its appropriation to the incidents before
him. Two other material objections must be noticed, as arising from the
conduct of the poem, which, in the first place, so far as it respects
the character of Adonis, is forced and unnatural; and, in the second,
has tempted the poet into the adoption of language so meretricious, as
entirely to vitiate the result of any moral purpose which he might have
had in view.

These deductions being premised, we do not hesitate to assert, that
the _Venus and Adonis_ contains many passages worthy of the genius of
Shakspeare; and that, as a whole, it is superior in poetic fervour
to any production of a similar kind by his contemporaries, anterior
to 1587. It will be necessary, however, where so much discrepancy of
opinion has existed, to substantiate the first of these assertions, by
the production of specimens which shall speak for themselves; and as
the conduct and moral of the piece have been given up as indefensible,
these must, consequently, be confined to a display of its poetic value;
of its occasional merit with regard to versification and imagery.

In the management of his stanza, Shakspeare has exhibited a more
general attention to accuracy of rhythm and harmony of cadence, than
was customary in his age; few metrical imperfections, indeed, are
discoverable either in this piece, or in any of his minor poems; but we
are not limited to this negative praise, being able to select from his
first effort instances of positive excellence in the structure of his
verse.

Of the light and airy elegance which occasionally characterises the
composition of his _Venus and Adonis_, the following will be accepted
as no inadequate proofs:—

    "Bid me discourse, I will enchant thine ear,
     Or, like a fairy, trip upon the green,
     Or, like a nymph, with long dishevel'd hair,
     Dance on the sands, and yet no footing seen.

           *       *       *       *       *

    "If love have lent you twenty thousand tongues,
     And every tongue more moving than your own,
     Bewitching like the wanton mermaid's songs,
     Yet from mine ear the tempting tune is blown."

To terminate each stanza with a couplet remarkable for its sweetness,
terseness, or strength, is a refinement almost peculiar to modern
times; yet Shakspeare has sometimes sought for, and obtained this
harmony of close: thus Venus, lamenting the beauty of Nature after the
death of Adonis, exclaims,

    "The flowers are sweet, their colours fresh and trim;
     But true-sweet beauty liv'd and dy'd with him;"

and again, when reproaching the apathy of her companion,—

    "O learn to love; the lesson is but plain,
     And, once made perfect, never lost again."

Nor are there wanting passages in which energy and force are very
skilfully combined with melody and rhythm; of the subsequent extracts,
which are truly excellent for their vigorous construction, the lines
in Italics present us with the point and cadence of the present
day. Venus, endeavouring to excite the affection of Adonis, who is
represented

    ——————— "more lovely than a man,
    More white and red than doves or roses are,"

tells him,

    "I have been woo'd, as I entreat thee now,
     Even by the stern and direful god of war,
     Whose sinewy neck in battle ne'er did bow—
     Over my altars hath he hung his lance,
     His batter'd shield, his uncontrolled crest,
     And for my sake hath learn'd to sport and dance,
     _To coy, to wanton, dally, smile, and jest_:"

and, on finding her efforts fruitless, she bursts forth into the
following energetic reproach:—

    "Fie, lifeless picture, cold and senseless stone,
     Well-painted idol, image, dull and dead,
     Statue, contenting but the eye alone,
     _Thing like a man, but of no woman bred_."

The death of Adonis, however, banishes all vestige of resentment,
and, amid numerous exclamations of grief and anguish, gives birth
to prophetic intimations of the hapless fate of all succeeding
attachments:—

    "Since thou art dead, lo! here I prophesy,
     Sorrow on love hereafter shall attend;
     It shall be waited on with jealousy,
     _Find sweet beginning, but unsavoury end_;—

     It shall suspect, where is no cause of fear;
     It shall not fear, where it should most mistrust;
     It shall be merciful, and too severe,
     _And most deceiving when it seems most just_;—

     It shall be fickle, false, and full of fraud,
     And shall be blasted in a breathing-while;
     The bottom poison, and the top o'er-straw'd
     With sweets, that shall the sharpest sight beguile:
     The strongest body shall it make most weak,
     _Strike the wise dumb, and teach the fool to speak_."

These passages are not given with the view of impressing upon the mind
of the reader, that such is the constant strain of the versification of
the _Venus and Adonis_; but merely to show, that, while in narrative
poetry he equals his contemporaries in the general structure of his
verse, he has produced, even in his earliest attempt, instances of
beauty, melody, and force, in the mechanism of his stanzas, which have
no parallel in their pages. In making this assertion, it must not be
forgotten, that we date the composition of _Venus and Adonis_ anterior
to 1590, that the comparison solely applies to narrative poetry, and
consequently that all contest with Spenser is precluded.

It now remains to be proved, that the merits of this mythological story
are not solely founded on its occasional felicity of versification; but
that in description, in the power of delineating, with a master's hand,
the various objects of nature, it possesses more claims to notice than
have hitherto been allowed.

After the noble pictures of the horse which we find drawn in the book
of Job, and in Virgil, few attempts to sketch this spirited animal can
be expected to succeed; yet, among these few, impartial criticism may
demand a station for the lines below:—

    "Imperiously he leaps, he neighs, he bounds,
     And now his woven girts he breaks asunder,
     The bearing earth with his hard hoof he wounds,
     Whose hollow womb resounds like heaven's thunder.—

     His ears up prick'd; his braided hanging mane
     Upon his compass'd crest now stands on end;
     His nostrils drink the air, and forth again,
     As from a furnace, vapours doth he send:—

     Sometimes he trots, as if he told the steps,
     With gentle majesty, and modest pride:
     Anon he rears upright, curvets and leaps,
     As who should say, lo! thus my strength is try'd.—

     Look, when a painter would surpass the life,
     In limning out a well-porportion'd steed,
     His art's with Nature's workmanship at strife,
     As if the dead the living should exceed;
     So did this horse excell a common one,
     In shape, in courage, colour, pace, and bone.

     Round-hoof'd, short-jointed, fetlocks shag and long,
     Broad-breast, full eyes, small head, and nostril wide,
     High crest, short ears, straight legs, and passing strong,
     Thin mane, thick tail, broad buttock, tender hide."

Venus, apprehensive for the fate of Adonis, should he attempt to hunt
the boar, endeavours to dissuade him from his purpose, by drawing a
most formidable description of that savage inmate of the woods, and
by painting, on the other hand, the pleasures to be derived from the
pursuit of the hare. The danger necessarily incurred from attacking the
former, and the various efforts by which the latter tries to escape
her pursuers, are presented to us with great fidelity and warmth of
colouring.

    "Thou had'st been gone, quoth she, sweet boy, ere this,
     But that thou told'st me, thou would'st hunt the boar,
     O be advis'd; thou know'st not what it is
     With javelin's point a churlish swine to gore,
       Whose tushes never-sheath'd he whetteth still,
       Like to a mortal butcher, bent to kill.

     On his bow back he hath a battle set
     Of bristly pikes, that ever threat his foes;
     His eyes, like glow-worms, shine when he doth fret;
     His snout digs sepulchres where-e'er he goes;
       Being mov'd, he strikes whate'er is in his way,
       And whom he strikes, his crooked tushes slay.

     His brawny sides, with hairy bristles armed,
     Are better proof than thy spear's point can enter;
     His short thick neck cannot be easily harmed;
     Being ireful, on the lion he will venture.—

     But if thou needs wilt hunt, be rul'd by me;
     Uncouple at the timorous flying hare,
     Or at the fox, which lives by subtlety,
     Or at the roe, which no encounter dare:
       Pursue these 