E-text prepared by Al Haines



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 18056-h.htm or 18056-h.zip:
      (https://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/1/8/0/5/18056/18056-h/18056-h.htm)
      or
      (https://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/1/8/0/5/18056/18056-h.zip)





THE TIN SOLDIER

by

TEMPLE BAILEY

Author of
Glory of Youth, Contrary Mary, Etc.

Illustrations by F. Vaux Wilson







[Frontispiece: "I shall come back for more"]





New York
Grosset & Dunlap
Publishers
Copyright 1918 by
The Penn Publishing Company
  First printing November, 1916.
  Second printing January, 1919.
  Third printing March, 1919.
  Fourth printing May, 1919.
  Sixth printing September, 1919.




The Tin Soldier




CONTENTS


BOOK ONE

ON THE SHELF

CHAPTER

      I  THE TOY SHOP
     II  CINDERELLA
    III  DRUSILLA
     IV  THE QUESTION
      V  THE SLACKER
     VI  THE PROMISE
    VII  HILDA
   VIII  THE SHADOWED ROOM
     IX  ROSE-COLOR!
      X  A MAN WITH MONEY
     XI  HILDA WEARS A CROWN
    XII  WHEN THE MORNING STARS SANG
   XIII  ARE MEN MADE ONLY FOR THIS?
    XIV  SHINING SOULS
     XV  HILDA BREAKS THE RULES
    XVI  JEAN-JOAN
   XVII  THE WHITE CAT


BOOK TWO

THROUGH THE CRACK

  XVIII THE BROAD HIGHWAY
    XIX HILDA SHAKES A TREE
     XX  THE VISION OF BRAVE WOMEN
    XXI  DERBY'S WIFE
   XXII  JEAN PLAYS PROXY


BOOK THREE

THE BUGLE CALLS

  XXIII  THE EMPTY HOUSE
   XXIV  THE SINGING WOMAN
    XXV  WHITE VIOLETS
   XXVI  THE HOPE OF THE WORLD
  XXVII  MARCHING FEET
 XXVIII  SIX DAYS
   XXIX  "HE CAME TO THE WARS!"




ILLUSTRATIONS


"I shall come back for more" . . . . . . _Frontispiece_

"I haven't anything left--for you"

"If anything should happen, you will remember?"

"These are my jewels"




BOOK ONE

ON THE SHELF

"I cannot bear it," the Tin Soldier said, standing on the shelf, "I
cannot bear it.  It is so melancholy here.  Let me rather go to the
wars and lose my arms and legs."

HANS ANDERSEN: The Old House.




THE TIN SOLDIER


CHAPTER I

THE TOY SHOP

The lights shining through the rain on the smooth street made of it a
golden river.

The shabby old gentleman navigated unsteadily until he came to a
corner.  A lamp-post offered safe harbor.  He steered for it and took
his bearings.  On each side of the glimmering stream loomed dark
houses.  A shadowy blot on the triangle he knew to be a church.  Beyond
the church was the intersecting avenue.  Down the avenue were the small
exclusive shops which were gradually encroaching on the residence
section.

The shabby old gentleman took out his watch.  It was a fine old watch,
not at all in accord with the rest of him.  It was almost six.  The
darkness of the November afternoon had come at five.  The shabby old
gentleman swung away from the lamppost and around the corner, then
bolted triumphantly into the Toy Shop.

"Here I am," he said, with an attempt at buoyancy, and sat down.

"Oh," said the girl behind the counter, "you are wet."

"Well, I said I'd come, didn't I?  Rain or shine?  In five minutes I
should have been too late--shop closed--"  He lurched a little towards
her.

She backed away from him.  "You--you are--wet--won't you take cold--?"

"Never take cold--glad to get here--"  He smiled and shut his eyes,
opened them and smiled again, nodded and recovered, nodded and came to
rest with his head on the counter.

The girl made a sudden rush for the rear door of the shop.  "Look here,
Emily.  Poor old duck!"

Emily, standing in the doorway, surveyed the sleeping derelict
scornfully.  "You'd better put him out.  It is six o'clock, Jean--"

"He was here yesterday--and he was furious because I wouldn't sell him
any soldiers.  He said he wanted to make a bonfire of the Prussian
ones--and to buy the French and English ones for his son," she laughed.

"Of course you told him they were not for sale."

"Yes.  But he insisted.  And when he went away he told me he'd come
again and bring a lot of money--"

The shabby old gentleman, rousing at the psychological moment, threw on
the counter a roll of bills and murmured brokenly:

  "'Ten little soldiers fighting on the line,
  One was blown to glory, and, then there were nine--!'"

His head fell forward and again he slept.

"Disgusting," said Emily Bridges; "of course we've got to get him out."

Getting him out, however, offered difficulties.  He was a very big old
gentleman, and they were little women.

"We might call the police--"

"Oh, Emily--"

"Well, if you can suggest anything better.  We must close the shop."

"We might put him in a taxi--and send him home."

"He probably hasn't any home."

"Don't be so pessimistic--he certainly has money."

"You don't know where he got it.  You can't be too careful, Jean--"

The girl, touching the old man's shoulder, asked, "Where do you live?"

He murmured indistinctly.

"Where?" she bent her ear down to him.

Waking, he sang:

  "Two little soldiers, blowing up a Hun--
  The darned thing--exploded--
  And then there was--One--"

"Oh, Emily, did you ever hear anything so funny?"

Emily couldn't see the funny side of it.  It was tragic and it was
disconcerting.  "I don't know what to do.  Perhaps you'd better call a
taxi."

"He's shivering, Emily.  I believe I'll make him a cup of chocolate."

"Dear child, it will be a lot of trouble--"

"I'd like to do it--really."

"Very well."  Emily was not unsympathetic, but she had had a rather
wearing life.  Her love of toys and of little children had kept her
human, otherwise she had a feeling that she might have hardened into
chill spinsterhood.

As Jean disappeared through the door, the elder woman moved about the
shop, setting it in order for the night.  It was a labor of love to put
the dolls to bed, to lock the glass doors safely on the puffy rabbits
and woolly dogs and round-eyed cats, to close the drawers on the
tea-sets and Lilliputian kitchens, to shut into boxes the tin soldiers
that their queer old customer had craved.

For more than a decade Emily Bridges had kept the shop.  Originally it
had been a Thread and Needle Shop, supplying people who did not care to
go downtown for such wares.

Then one Christmas she had put in a few things to attract the children.
The children had come, and gradually there had been more toys--until at
last she had found herself the owner of a Toy Shop, with the thread and
needle and other staid articles stuck negligently in the background.

Yet in the last three years it had been hard to keep up the standard
which she had set for herself.  Toys were made in Germany, and the men
who had made them were in the trenches, the women who had helped were
in the fields--the days when the bisque babies had smiled on happy
working-households were over.  There was death and darkness where once
the rollicking clowns and dancing dolls had been set to mechanical
music.

Jean, coming back with the chocolate, found Emily with a great white
plush elephant in her arms.  His trappings were of red velvet and there
was much gold; he was the last of a line of assorted sizes.

There had always been a white elephant in Miss Emily's window.
Painfully she had seen her supply dwindle.  For this last of the herd,
she had a feeling far in excess of his value, such as a collector might
have for a rare coin of a certain minting, or a bit of pottery of a
pre-historic period.

She had not had the heart to sell him.  "I may never get another.  And
there are none made like him in America."

"After the war--" Jean had hinted.

Miss Emily had flared, "Do you think I shall buy toys of Germany after
this war?"

"Good for you, Emily.  I was afraid you might."

But tonight a little pensively Miss Emily wrapped the old mastodon up
in a white cloth.  "I believe I'll take him home with me.  People are
always asking to buy him, and it's hard to explain."

"I should say it is.  I had an awful time with him," she indicated the
old gentleman, "yesterday."

She set the tray down on the counter.  There was a slim silver pot on
it, and a thin green cup.  She poked the sleeping man with a tentative
finger.  "Won't you please wake up and have some chocolate."

Rousing, he came slowly to the fact of her hospitality.  "My dear young
lady," he said, with a trace of courtliness, "you shouldn't have
troubled--" and reached out a trembling hand for the cup.  There was a
ring on the hand, a seal ring with a coat of arms.  As he drank the
chocolate eagerly, he spilled some of it on his shabby old coat.

He was facing the door.  Suddenly it opened, and his cup fell with a
crash.

A young man came in.  He too, was shabby, but not as shabby as the old
gentleman.  He had on a dilapidated rain-coat, and a soft hat.  He took
off his hat, showing hair that was of an almost silvery fairness.  His
eyebrows made a dark pencilled line--his eyes were gray.  It was a
striking face, given a slightly foreign air by a small mustache.

He walked straight up to the old man, laid his hand on his shoulder,
"Hello, Dad."  Then, anxiously, to the two women, "I hope he hasn't
troubled you.  He isn't quite--himself."

Jean nodded.  "I am so glad you came.  We didn't know what to do."

"I've been looking for him--"  He bent to pick up the broken cup.  "I'm
dreadfully sorry.  You must let me pay for it."

"Oh, no."

"Please."  He was looking at it.  "It was valuable?"

"Yes," Jean admitted, "it was one of Emily's precious pets."

"Please don't think any more about it," Emily begged.  "You had better
get your father home at once, and put him to bed with a hot water
bottle."

Now that the shabby youth was looking at her with troubled eyes, Emily
found herself softening towards the old gentleman.  Simply as a
derelict she had not cared what became of him.  But as the father of
this son, she cared.

"Thank you, I will.  We must be going, Dad."

The old gentleman stood up.  "Wait a minute--I came for tin
soldiers--Derry--"

"They are not for sale," Miss Emily stated.  "They are made in Germany.
I can't get any more.  I have withdrawn everything of the kind from my
selling stock."

The shabby old gentleman murmured, disconsolately.

"Oh, Emily," said the girl behind the counter, "don't you think we
might--?"

Derry Drake glanced at her with sudden interest.  She had an unusual
voice, quick and thrilling.  It matched her beauty, which was of a rare
quality--white skin, blue eyes, crinkled hair like beaten copper.

"I don't see," he said, smiling for the first time, "what Dad wants of
tin soldiers."

"To make 'em fight," said the shabby old man, "we've got to have some
fighting blood in the family."

The smile was struck from the young man's face.  Out of a dead silence,
he said at last, "You were very good to look after him.  Come, Dad."
His voice was steady, but the flush that had flamed in his cheeks was
still there, as he put his arm about the shaky old man and led him to
the door.

"Thank you both again," he said from the threshold.  Then, with his
head high, he steered his unsteady parent out into the rain.

It was late when the two women left the shop.  Miss Emily, struggling
down the block with her white elephant, found, in a few minutes, harbor
in her boarding house.  But Jean lived in the more fashionable section
beyond Dupont Circle.  Her father was a doctor with a practice among
the older district people, who, in spite of changing administrations
and fluctuating populations, had managed, to preserve their family
traditions and social identity.

Dr. McKenzie did not always dine at home.  But tonight when Jean came
down he was at the head of the table.  He was a big, handsome man with
crinkled hair like his daughter's, copper-colored and cut close to his
rather classic head.

Hilda Merritt was also at the table.  She was a trained nurse, who,
having begun life as the Doctor's office-girl, had, gradually, after
his wife's death, assumed the management of his household.  Jean was
not fond of her.  She had repeatedly begged that her dear Emily might
take Miss Merritt's place.

"But Hilda is much younger," her father had contended, "and much more
of a companion for you."

"She isn't a companion at all, Daddy.  We haven't the same thoughts."

But Hilda had stayed on, and Jean had sought her dear Emily's company
in the little shop.  Sometimes she waited on customers.  Sometimes she
worked in the rear room.  It was always a great joke to feel that she
was really helping.  In all her life her father had never let her do a
useful thing.

The table was lighted with candles, and there was a silver dish of
fruit in the center.  The dinner was well-served by a trim maid.

Jean ate very little.  Her father noticed her lack of appetite, "Why
don't you eat your dinner, dear?"

"I had chocolate at Emily's."

"I don't think she ought to go there so often," Miss Merritt complained.

"Why not?"  Jean's voice was like the crack of a whip.

"It is so late when you get home.  It isn't safe."

"I can always send the car for you, Jean," her father said.  "I don't
care to have you out alone."

"Having the car isn't like walking.  You know it isn't, Daddy, with the
rain against your cheeks and the wind--"

Dr. McKenzie's quick imagination was fired.  His eyes were like Jean's,
lighted from within.

"I suppose it is all right if she comes straight up Connecticut Avenue,
Hilda?"

Miss Merritt had long white hands which lay rather limply on the table.
Her arms were bare.  She was handsome in a red-cheeked, blond fashion.

"Of course if you think it is all right, Doctor--"

"It is up to Jean.  If she isn't afraid, we needn't worry."

"I'm not afraid of anything."

He smiled at her.  She was so pretty and slim and feminine in her white
gown, with a string of pearls on her white neck.  He liked pretty
things and he liked her fearlessness.  He had never been afraid.  It
pleased him that his daughter should share his courage.

"Perhaps, if I am not too busy, I will come for you the next time you
go to the shop.  Would walking with me break the spell of the wind and
wet?"

"You know it wouldn't.  It would be quite--heavenly--Daddy."

After dinner, Doctor McKenzie read the evening paper.  Jean sat on the
rug in front of the fire and knitted for the soldiers.  She had made
sweaters until it seemed sometimes as if she saw life through a haze of
olive-drab.

"I am going to knit socks next," she told her father.

He looked up from his paper.  "Did you ever stop to think what it means
to a man over there when a woman says 'I'm going to knit socks'?"

Jean nodded.  That was one of the charms which her father had for her.
He saw things.  It was tired soldiers at this moment, marching in the
cold and needing--socks.

Hilda, having no vision, remarked from the corner where she sat with
her book, "There's no sense in all this killing--I wish we'd kept out
of it."

"Wasn't there any sense," said little Jean from the hearth rug, "in
Bunker Hill and Valley Forge?"

Hilda evaded that.  "Anyhow, I'm glad they've stopped playing the
'Star-Spangled Banner' at the movies.  I'm tired of standing up."

Jean voiced her scorn.  "I'd stand until I dropped, rather than miss a
note of it."

Doctor McKenzie interposed:

  "'The time has come,' the Walrus said,
  'To talk of many things,
  Of shoes--and ships--and sealing wax--
  Of cabbages--and kings--'"

"Oh, Daddy," Jean reproached him, "I should think you might be serious."

"I am not just twenty--and I have learned to bank my fires.  And you
mustn't take Hilda too literally.  She doesn't mean all that she says,
do you, Hilda?"

He patted Miss Merritt on the shoulder as he went out.  Jean hated
that.  And Hilda's blush.

With the Doctor gone, Hilda shut herself up in the office to balance
her books.

Jean went on with her knitting, Hilda did not knit.  When she was not
helping in the office or in the house, her hands lay idle in her lap.

Jean's mind, as she worked, was on those long white hands of Hilda's.
Her own hands had short fingers like her father's.  Her mother's hands
had been slender and transparent.  Hilda's hands were not slender, they
had breadth as well as length, and the skin was thick.  Even the
whiteness was like the flesh of a fish, pale and flabby.  No, there was
no beauty at all in Hilda's hands.

Once Jean had criticised them to her father.  "I think they are ugly."

"They are useful hands, and they have often helped me."

"I like Emily's hands much better."

"Oh, you and your Emily," he had teased.

Yet Jean's words came back to the Doctor the next night, as he sat in
the Toy Shop waiting to escort his daughter home.

Miss Emily was serving a customer, a small boy in a red coat and baggy
trousers.  A nurse stood behind the small boy, and played, as it were,
Chorus.  She wore a blue cape and a long blue bow on the back of her
hat.

The small boy was having the mechanical toys wound up for him.  He
expressed a preference for the clowns, but didn't like the colors.

"I want him boo'," he informed Miss Emily, "he's for a girl, and she
yikes boo'."

"Blue," said the nurse austerely, "you know your mother doesn't like
baby talk, Teddy."

"Ble-yew--" said the small boy, carefully.

"Blue clowns," Miss Emily stated, sympathetically, "are hard to get.
Most of them are red.  I have the nicest thing that I haven't shown
you.  But it costs a lot--"

"It's a birfday present," said the small boy.

"Birthday," from the Chorus.

"Be-yirthday," was the amended version, "and I want it nice."

Miss Emily brought forth from behind the glass doors of a case a small
green silk head of lettuce.  She set it on the counter, and her fingers
found the key, then clickety-click, clickety-click, she wound it up.
It played a faint tune, the leaves opened--a rabbit with a wide-frilled
collar rose in the center.  He turned from side to side, he waggled his
ears, and nodded his head, he winked an eye; then he disappeared, the
leaves closed, the music stopped.

The small boy was entranced.  "It's boo-ful--"

"Beautiful--" from the background.

"Be-yewtiful--.  I'll take it, please."

It was while Miss Emily was winding the toy that Dr. McKenzie noticed
her bands.  They were young hands, quick and delightful hands.  They
hovered over the toy, caressingly, beat time to the music, rested for a
moment on the shoulders of the little boy as he stood finally with
upturned face and tied-up parcel.

"I'm coming adain," he told her.

"Again--."

"Ag-yain--," patiently.

"I hope you will."  Miss Emily held out her hand.  She did not kiss
him.  He was a boy, and she knew better.

When he had gone, importantly, Emily saw the Doctor's eyes upon her.
"I hated to sell it," she said, with a sigh; "goodness knows when I
shall get another.  But I can't resist the children--"

He laughed.  "You are a miser, Emily."

He had known her for many years.  She was his wife's distant cousin,
and had been her dearest friend.  She had taught in a private school
before she opened her shop, and Jean had been one of her pupils.  Since
Mrs. McKenzie's death it had been Emily who had mothered Jean.

The Doctor had always liked her, but without enthusiasm.  His
admiration of women depended largely on their looks.  His wife had
meant more to him than that, but it had been her beauty which had first
held him.

Emily Bridges had been a slender and diffident girl.  She had kept her
slenderness, but she had lost her diffidence, and she had gained an air
of distinction.  She dressed well, her really pretty feet were always
carefully shod and her hair carefully waved.  Yet she was one of the
women who occupy the background rather than the foreground of men's
lives--the kind of woman for whom a man must be a Columbus, discovering
new worlds for himself.

"Yon are a miser," the Doctor repeated.

"Wouldn't you be, under the same circumstances?  If it were, for
example, surgical instruments--anaesthetics--?  And you knew that when
they were gone you wouldn't get any more?"

He did not like logic in a woman.  He wanted to laugh and tease.  "Jean
told me about the white elephant."

"Well, what of it?  I have him at home--safe.  In a big box--with
moth-balls--"  Her lips twitched.  "Oh, it must seem funny to anyone
who doesn't feel as I do."

The door of the rear room opened, and Jean came in, carrying in her
arms an assortment of strange creatures which she set in a row on the
floor in front of her father.

"There?" she asked, "what do you think of them?"

They were silhouettes of birds and beasts, made of wood, painted and
varnished.  But such ducks had never quacked, such geese had never
waddled, such dogs had never barked--fantastic as a nightmare--too
long--too broad--exaggerated out of all reality, they might have
marched with Alice from Wonderland or from behind the Looking Glass.

"I made them, Daddy."

"You--."

"Yes, do you like them?"

"Aren't they a bit--uncanny?"

"We've sold dozens; the children adore them."

"And you haven't told me you were doing it.  Why?"

"I wanted you to see them first--a surprise.  We call them the Lovely
Dreams, and we made the ducks green and the pussy cats pink because
that's the way the children see them in their own little minds--"

She was radiant.  "And I am making money, Daddy.  Emily had such a hard
time getting toys after the war began, so we thought we'd try.  And we
worked out these.  I get a percentage on all sales."

He frowned.  "I am not sure that I like that."

"Why not?"

"Don't I give you money enough?"

"Of course.  But this is different."

"How different?"

"It is my own.  Don't you see?"

Being a man he did not see, but Miss Emily did.  "Any work that is
worth doing at all is worth being paid for.  You know that, Doctor."

He did know it, but he didn't like to have a woman tell him.  "She
doesn't need the money."

"I do.  I am giving it to the Red Cross.  Please don't be stuffy about
it, Daddy."

"Am I stuffy?"

"Yes."

He tried to redeem himself by a rather tardy enthusiasm and succeeded.
Jean brought out more Lovely Dreams, until a grotesque procession
stretched across the room.

"Tomorrow," she announced, triumphantly, "we'll put them in the window,
and you'll see the children coming."

As she carried them away, Doctor McKenzie said to Emily, "It seems
strange that she should want to do it."

"Not at all.  She needs an outlet for her energies."

"Oh, does she?"

"If she weren't your daughter, you'd know it."

On the way home he said, "I am very proud of you, my dear."

Jean had tucked her arm through his.  It was not raining, but the sky
was full of ragged clouds, and the wind blew strongly.  They felt the
push of it as they walked against it.

"Oh," she said, with her cheek against his rough coat, "are you proud
of me because of my green ducks and my pink pussy cats?"

But she knew it was more than that, although he laughed, and she
laughed with him, as if his pride in her was a thing which they took
lightly.  But they both walked a little faster to keep pace with their
quickened blood.

Thus their walk became a sort of triumphant progress.  They passed the
British Embassy with the Lion and the Unicorn watching over it in the
night; they rounded the Circle and came suddenly upon a line of motor
cars.

"The Secretary is dining a rather important commission," the Doctor
said; "it was in the paper.  They are to have a war feast--three
courses, no wine, and limited meats and sweets."

They stopped for a moment as the guests descended from their cars and
swept across the sidewalk.  The lantern which swung low from the arched
entrance showed a spot of rosy color--the velvet wrap of a girl whose
knot of dark curls shone above the ermine collar.  A Spanish comb,
encrusted with diamonds, was stuck at right angles to the knot.

Beside the young woman in the rosy wrap walked a young man in a fur
coat who topped her by a head.  He had gray eyes and a small upturned
mustache--Jean uttered an exclamation.

"What's the matter?" her father asked.

"Oh, nothing--" she watched the two ascend the stairs.  "I thought for
a moment that I knew him."

The great door opened and closed, the rosy wrap and the fur coat were
swallowed up.

"Of course it couldn't be," Jean decided as she and her father
continued on their wonderful way.

"Couldn't be what, my dear?"

"The same man, Daddy," Jean said, and changed the subject.




CHAPTER II

CINDERELLA

The next time that Jean saw Him was at the theater.  She and her father
went to worship at the shrine of Maude Adams, and He was there.

It was Jean's yearly treat.  There were, of course, other plays.  But
since her very-small-girlhood, there had been always that red-letter
night when "The Little Minister" or "Hop-o'-my-Thumb" or "Peter Pan"
had transported her straight from the real world to that whimsical,
tender, delightful realm where Barrie reigns.

Peter Pan had been the climax!

_Do you believe in fairies?_

Of course she did.  And so did Miss Emily.  And so did her father,
except in certain backsliding moments.  But Hilda didn't.

Tonight it was "A Kiss for Cinderella"--!  The very name had been
enough to set Jean's cheeks burning and her eyes shining.

"Do you remember, Daddy, that I was six when I first saw her, and she's
as young as ever?"

"Younger."  It was at such moments that the Doctor was at his best.
The youth in him matched the youth in his daughter.  They were boy and
girl together.

And now the girl on the stage, whose undying youth made her the
interpreter of dreams for those who would never grow up, wove her magic
spells of tears and laughter.

It was not until the first satisfying act was over that Jean drew a
long breath and looked about her.

The house was packed.  The old theater with its painted curtain had
nothing modern to recommend it.  But to Jean's mind it could not have
been improved.  She wanted not one thing changed.  For years and years
she had sat in her favorite seat in the seventh row of the parquet and
had loved the golden proscenium arch, the painted goddesses, the red
velvet hangings--she had thrilled to the voice and gesture of the
artists who had played to please her.  There had been "Wang" and "The
Wizard of Oz"; "Robin Hood"; the tall comedian of "Casey at the Bat";
the short comedian who had danced to fame on his crooked legs; Mrs.
Fiske, most incomparable Becky; Mansfield, Sothern--some of them, alas,
already gods of yesterday!

At first there had been matinees with her mother--"The Little
Princess," over whose sorrows she had wept in the harrowing first act,
having to be consoled with chocolates and the promise of brighter
things as the play progressed.

Now and then she had come with Hilda.  But never when she could help
it.  "I'd rather stay at home," she had told her father.

"But--why--?"

"Because she laughs in the wrong places."

Her father never laughed in the wrong places, and he squeezed her hand
in those breathless moments where words would have been desecration,
and wiped his eyes frankly when his feelings were stirred.

"There is no one like you, Daddy," she had told him, "to enjoy things."
And so it had come about that he had pushed away his work on certain
nights and, sitting beside her, had forgotten the sordid and suffering
world which he knew so well, and which she knew not at all.

As her eyes swept the house, they rested at last with a rather puzzled
look on a stout old gentleman with a wide shirt-front, who sat in the
right-hand box.  He had white hair and a red face.

Where had she seen him?

There were women in the box, a sparkling company in white and silver,
and black and diamonds, and green and gold.  There was a big
bald-headed man, and quite in the shadow back of them all, a slender
youth.

It was when the slender youth leaned forward to speak to the vision in
white and silver that Jean stared and stared again.

She knew now where she had seen the old gentleman with the wide shirt
front.  He was the shabby old gentleman of the Toy Shop!  And the youth
was the shabby son!

Yet here they were in state and elegance!  As if a fairy godmother had
waved a wand--!

The curtain went up on a feverish little slavey with her mind set on
going to the ball, on Our Policeman wanting a shave, on the orphans in
boxes, on baked potato offered as hospitality by a half-starved
hostess, on a waiting Cinderella asleep on a frozen doorstep.

And then the ball--and Mona Lisa, and the Duchess of Devonshire, and
The Girl with the Pitcher and the Girl with the Muff--and Cinderella in
azure tulle and cloth-of-gold, dancing with the Prince at the end like
mad--.

Then the bell boomed--the lights went out--and after a little moment,
one saw Cinderella, stripped of her finery, staggering up the stairs.

Jean cried and laughed, and cried again.  Yet even in the midst of her
emotion, she found her eyes pulled away from that appealing figure on
the stage to those faintly illumined figures in the box.

When the curtain went down, her father, most surprisingly, bowed to the
old gentleman and received in return a genial nod.

"Oh, do you know him?" she demanded.

"Yes.  It is General Drake."

"Who are the others?"

"I am not sure about the women.  The boy in the back of the box is his
son, DeRhymer Drake."

Derry!

"Oh,"--she had a feeling that she was not being quite candid with her
father--"he's rather swank, isn't he, Daddy?"

"Heavens, what slang!  I don't see where you get it.  He is rich, if
that's what you mean, and it's a wonder he isn't spoiled to death.  His
mother is dead, and the General is his own worst enemy; eats and drinks
too much, and thinks he can get away with it."

"Are they very rich--?"

"Millions, with only Derry to leave it to.  He's the child of a second
wife."

Oh, lovely, lovely, lovely Cinderella, could your godmother do more
than this?  To endow two rained-on and shabby gentlemen with pomp and
circumstance!

Jean tucked her hand into her father's, as if to anchor herself against
this amazing tide of revelation.  Then, as the auditorium darkened, and
the curtain went up, she was swept along on a wave of emotions in which
the play world and the real world were inextricably mixed.

And now Our Policeman discovers that he is "romantical."  Cinderella
finds her Prince, who isn't in the least the Prince of the fairy tale,
but much nicer under the circumstance--and the curtain goes down on a
glass slipper stuck on the toes of two tiny feet and a cockney
Cinderella, quite content.

"Well," Jean drew a long breath.  "It was the loveliest ever, Daddy,"
she said, as he helped her with her cloak.

And it was while she stood there in that cloak of heavenly blue that
the young man in the box looked down and saw her.

He batted his eyes.

Of course she wasn't real.

But when he opened them, there she was, smiling up into the face of the
man who had helped her into that heavenly garment.

It came to him, quite suddenly, that his father had bowed to the
man--the big man with the classic head and the air of being at ease
with himself and the world.

He did things to the velvet and ermine wrap that he was holding, which
seemed to satisfy its owner, then he gripped his father's arm.  "Dad,
who is that big man down there--with the red head--the one who bowed to
you?"

"Dr. McKenzie, Bruce McKenzie, the nerve specialist--"

Of course it was something to know that, but one didn't get very far.

"Let's go somewhere and eat," said the General, and that was the end of
it.  Out of the tail of his eye, Derry Drake saw the two figures with
the copper-colored heads move down the aisle, to be finally merged into
the indistinguishable stream of humanity which surged towards the door.

Jean and her father did not go to supper at the big hotel around the
corner as was their custom.

"I've got to get to the hospital before twelve," the Doctor said.  "I
am sorry, dear--"

"It doesn't make a bit of difference.  I don't want to eat," she
settled herself comfortably beside him in the car.  "Oh, it is snowing,
Daddy, how splendid--"

He laughed.  "You little bundle of--ecstasy--what am I going to do with
you?"

"Love me.  And isn't the snow--wonderful?"

"Yes.  But everybody doesn't see it that way."

"I am glad that I do.  I should hate to see nothing in all this
miracle, but--slush tomorrow--"

"Yet a lot of life is just--slush tomorrow--.  I wish you need never
find that out--."

When Jean went into the house, and her father drove on, she found Hilda
waiting up for her.

"Father had to go to the hospital."

"Did you have anything to eat?"

"No."

"I thought I might cook some oysters."

"I am really not hungry."  Then feeling that her tone was ungracious,
she tried to make amends.  "It was nice of you to think of it--"

"Your father may like them.  I'll have them hot for him."

Jean lingered uncertainly.  She didn't want the food, but she hated to
leave the field to Hilda.  She unfastened her cloak, and sat down.
"How are you going to cook them?"

"Panned--with celery."

"It sounds good--I think I'll stay down, Hilda."

"As you wish."

The Doctor, coming in with his coat powdered with snow, found his
daughter in a big chair in front of the library fire.

"I thought you'd be in bed."

"Hilda has some oysters for us."

"Fine--I'm starved."

She looked at him, meditatively, "I don't see how you can be."

"Why not?"

"Oh, on such a night as this, Daddy?  Food seems superfluous."

He sat down, smiling.  "Don't ever expect to feed any man over forty on
star-dust.  Hilda knows better, don't you, Hilda?"

Hilda was bringing in the tray.  There was a copper chafing-dish and a
percolator.  She wore her nurse's outfit of white linen.  She looked
well in it, and she was apt to put it on after dinner, when she was in
charge of the office.

"You know better than to feed a man on stardust, don't you?" the Doctor
persisted.

Hilda lifted the cover of the chafing-dish and stirred the contents.
"Well, yes," she smiled at him, "you see, I have lived longer than
Jean.  She'll learn."

"I don't want to learn," Jean told her hotly.  "I want to believe
that--that--"  Words failed her.

"That men can live on star-dust?" her father asked gently.  "Well, so
be it.  We won't quarrel with her, will we, Hilda?"

The oysters were very good.  Jean ate several with healthy appetite.
Her father, twinkling, teased her, "You see--?"

She shrugged, "All the same, I didn't need them."

Hilda, putting things back on the tray, remarked: "There was a message
from Mrs. Witherspoon.  Her son is on leave for the week end.  She
wants you for dinner on Saturday night--both of you."

Doctor McKenzie tapped a finger on the table thoughtfully, "Oh, does
she?  Do you want to go, Jeanie?"

"Yes.  Don't you?"

"I am not sure.  I should like to build a fence about you, my dear, and
never let a man look over.  Ralph Witherspoon wants to marry her,
Hilda, what do you think of that?"

"Well, why not?"  Hilda laid her long hands flat on the table, leaning
on them.

Jean felt little prickles of irritability.  "Because I don't want to
get married, Hilda."

Hilda gave her a sidelong glance, "Of course you do.  But you don't
know it."

She went out with her tray.  Jean turned, white-faced, to her father,
"I wish she wouldn't say such things--"

"My dear, I am afraid you don't quite do her justice."

"Oh, well, we won't talk about her.  I've got to go to bed, Daddy."

She kissed him wistfully.  "Sometimes I think there are two of you, the
one that likes me, and the one that likes Hilda."

With his hands on her shoulders, he gave an easy laugh.  "Who knows?
But you mustn't have it on your mind.  It isn't good for you."

"I shall always have you on my mind--."

"But not to worry about, baby.  I'm not worth it--."

Hilda came in with the evening paper. "Have you read it, Doctor?"

"No."  He glanced at the headlines and his face grew hard.  "More
frightfulness," he said, stormily.  "If I had my way, it should be an
eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth.  For every man they have tortured,
there should be one of their men--tortured.  For every child mutilated,
one of theirs--mutilated.  For every woman--."

He stopped.  Jean had caught hold of his arm.  "Don't, Daddy," she said
thickly, "it makes me afraid of you."  She covered her face with her
hands.

He drew her to him and smoothed her hair in silence.  Over her head he
glanced at Hilda.  She was smiling inscrutably into the fire.




CHAPTER III

DRUSILLA

The thing that Derry Drake had on his mind the next morning was a
tea-cup.  There were other things on his mind--things so heavy that he
turned with relief to the contemplation of cups.

Stuck all over the great house were cabinets of china--his father had
collected and his mother had prized.  Derry, himself, had not cared for
any of it until this morning, but when Bronson, the old man who served
him and had served his father for years, came in with his breakfast,
Derry showed him a broken bit which he had brought home with him two
nights before.  "Have we a cup like this anywhere in the house,
Bronson?"

"There's a lot of them, sir, in the blue room, in the wall cupboard."

"I thought so, let me have one of them.  If Dad ever asks for it, send
him to me.  He broke the other, so it's a fair exchange."

He had it carefully wrapped and carried it downtown with him.  The
morning was clear, and the sun sparkled on the snow.  As he passed
through Dupont Circle he found that a few children and their nurses had
braved the cold.  One small boy in a red coat ran to Derry.

"Where are you going, Cousin Derry?"

"Down town."

"To-day is Margaret-Mary's birf-day.  I am going to give her a
wabbit--."

"Rabbit, Buster.  You'd better say it quick.  Nurse is on the way."

"Rab-yit.  What are you going to give her?"

"Oh, must I give her something?"

"Of course.  Mother said you'd forget it.  I wanted to telephone, and
she wouldn't let me."

"Would a doll do?"

"I shouldn't like a doll.  But she is littler.  And you mustn't spend
much money.  Mother said I spent too much for my rab-yit.  That I ought
to save it for Our Men.  And you mustn't eat what you yike--we've got a
card in the window, and there wasn't any bacon for bref-fus."

"Breakfast."

"Yes.  An' we had puffed rice and prunes--"

Nurse, coming up, was immediately on the job.  "You are getting mud on
Mr. Derry's spats, Teddy.  Stand up like a little gentleman."

"He is always that, Nurse, isn't he?  And I should not have on spats at
this hour in the morning."

Derry smiled to himself as he left them.  He knew that Nurse did not
approve of him.  He had a way as it were of aiding and abetting Teddy.

But as he went on the smile faded.  There were many soldiers on the
street, many uniforms, flags of many nations draping doorways where
were housed the men from across the sea who were working shoulder to
shoulder with America for the winning of the war--.  Washington had
taken on a new aspect.  It had a waked-up look, as if its lazy days
were over, and there were real things to do.

The big church at the triangle showed a Red Cross banner.  Within women
were making bandages, knitting sweaters and socks, sewing up the long
seams of shirts and pajamas.  A few years ago they had worshipped a
Christ among the lilies.  They saw him now on the battlefield,
crucified again in the cause of humanity.

It seemed to Derry that even the civilians walked with something of a
martial stride.  Men, who for years had felt their strength sapped by
the monotony of Government service, were revived by the winds of
patriotism which swept from the four corners of the earth.  Women who
had lost youth and looks in the treadmill of Departmental life held up
their heads as if their eyes beheld a new vision.

Street cars were crowded, things were at sixes and sevens; red tape was
loose where it should have been tight and tight where it should have
been loose.  Little men with the rank of officer sat in swivel chairs
and tried to direct big things; big men, without rank, were tied to the
trivial.  Many, many things were wrong, and many, many things were
right, as it is always when war comes upon a people unprepared.

And in the midst of all this clash and crash and movement and
achievement, Derry was walking to a toy shop to carry a tea-cup!

He found Miss Emily alone in the big front room.

She did not at once recognize him.

"You remember I was in here the other night--and you wouldn't sell--tin
soldiers--."

She flushed a little.  "Oh, with your father?"

"Yes.  He's a dear old chap--."

It was the best apology he could make, and she loved him for it.

He brought out the cup and set it on the counter.  "It is like yours?"

"Yes."  But she did not want to take it.

"Please.  I brought it on purpose.  We have a dozen."

"Of these?"

"Yes."

"But it will break your set."

"We have oodles of sets.  Dad collects--you know--  There are dishes
enough in the house to start a crockery shop."

She glanced at him curiously.  It was hard to reconcile this slim young
man of fashion with the shabby boy of the other night.  But there were
the lad's eyes, smiling into hers!

"I should like, too, if you don't mind, to find a toy for a very little
girl.  It is her birthday, and I had forgotten."

"It is dreadful to forget," Miss Emily told him, "children care so
much."

"I have never forgotten before, but I had so much on my mind."

She brought forth the Lovely Dreams--"They have been a great success."

He chose at once a rose-colored cat and a yellow owl.  The cat was
carved impressionistically in a series of circles.  She was altogether
celestial and comfortable.  The owl might have been lighted by the moon.

"But why?" Derry asked, "a rose-colored cat?"

"Isn't a white cat pink and puffy in the firelight?  And a child sees
her pink and puffy.  If we don't it is because we are blind."

"But why the green ducks and the amethyst cows?"

"The cows are coming tinkling home in the twilight--the green ducks
swim under the willows.  And they are longer and broader because of the
lights and shadows.  That's the way you saw them when you were six."

"By Jove," he said, staring, "I believe I did."

"So there's nothing queer about them to the children--you ought to see
them listen when Jean tells them."

Jean--!

"She--she tells the children?"

"Yes.  Charming stories.  I am having them put in a little pamphlet to
go with the toys."

"She's Dr. McKenzie's daughter, isn't she?  I saw her last night at the
play."

"Yes.  Such a dear child.  She is usually here in the afternoon."

He had hoped until then that Jean might be hidden in that rear room,
locked up with the dolls in a drawer, tucked away in a box--he had a
blank feeling of the futility of his tea-cup--

Then, suddenly, the gods being in a gay mood, Jean arrived!

At once his errand justified itself.  She wore a gray squirrel jacket
and a hat to match--and her crinkled copper-colored hair came out from
under the hat and over her ears.  She carried a little muff.  Her
eyes--the color of her cheeks!  A man might walk to the world's end for
less than this--!

He was buying, he told her, pink pussy cats and yellow owls.  Had she
liked the play last night?  He was glad that she adored Maude Adams.
He adored--Maude Adams.  Did she remember "Peter Pan"?  Yes, he had
gone to everything--glorified matinees--glorified everything!  Wasn't
it remarkable that his father knew her father?  And she was Jean
McKenzie, and he was Derry Drake!

At last there was no excuse for him to linger.  "I shall come back for
more--Lovely Dreams," he told Miss Emily, and got away.

Alone in the shop the two women looked at each other.  Then Emily said,
"Jean, darling, how dreadful it must be for him."

"Dreadful--."

"With such a father--."

"Oh, you mean--the other night."

"Yes.  He isn't happy, Jean."

"How do you know?"

"He has lonesome eyes."

"Oh, Emily."

"Well, he has, and it must be dreadful."

How dreadful it was neither of them could really know.  Derry, having
lunched with a rather important committee, went to Drusilla Gray's in
the afternoon for a cup of tea.  He was called almost at once to the
telephone.  Bronson was at the other end.  "I am sorry, Mr. Derry, but
I thought you ought to know--"

Derry, with the sick feeling which always came over him with the
knowledge of what was ahead, said steadily, "That's all right,
Bronson--which way did he go?"

"He took the Cabin John car, sir.  I tried to get on, but he saw me,
and sent me back, and I didn't like to make a scene.  Shall I follow in
a taxi?"

"Yes; I'll get away as soon as I can and call you up out there."

He went back to Drusilla.  "Sing for me," he said.  Drusilla Gray lived
with her Aunt Marion in an apartment winch overlooked Rock Creek.
Marion Gray occupied herself with the writing of books.  Drusilla had
varying occupations.  Just now she was interested in interior
decoration and in the war.

She was also interested in trying to flirt with Derry Drake.  "He won't
play the game," she told her aunt, "and that's why I like it--the game,
I mean."

"You like him because he hasn't surrendered."

"No.  He is a rather perfect thing of his kind, like a bit of jewelled
Sevres or _Sang de boeuf_.  And he doesn't know it.  And that's another
thing in his favor--his modesty.  He makes me think of a little
Austrian prince I once met at Palm Beach; who wore a white satin shirt
with a high collar of gold embroidery, and white kid boots, and
wonderful rings--and his nails long like a Chinaman's.  At first we
laughed at him--called him effeminate--.  But after we knew him we
didn't laugh.  There was the blood in him of kings and rulers--and
presently he had us on our knees.  And Derry's like that.  When you
first meet him you look over his head; then you find yourself looking
up--"

Marion smiled.  "You've got it bad, Drusilla."

"If you think I am in love with him, I'm not.  I'd like to be, but it
wouldn't be of any use.  He's a Galahad--a pocket-edition Galahad.  If
he ever falls in love, there'll be more of romance in it than I can
give him."

It was to this Drusilla that Derry had come.  He liked her immensely.
And they had in common a great love of music.

She had tea for him, and some rather strange little spiced cakes on a
red lacquer tray.  There was much dark blue and vivid red in the room,
with white woodwork.  Drusilla herself was in unrelieved red.  The
effect was startling but stimulating.

"I am not sure that I like it," she said, "the red and white and blue,
but I wanted to see whether I could do it.  And Aunt Marion doesn't
care.  The red things can all be taken out, and the rest toned down.
But I have a feeling that a man couldn't sit in this room and be a
slacker."

"No, he couldn't," Derry agreed.  "You'd better hang out a recruiting
sign, Drusilla."

"I should if they would let me.  The best I can do is ask them to tea
and sing for them."

It was right here that Bronson's message had broken in, and Derry,
coming back from the telephone, had said, "Sing for me."

Drusilla lighted two red candles on the piano in the alcove.  She began
with a medley of patriotic songs.  With her voice never soaring above a
repressed note, she managed to give the effect of culminating emotion,
so that when she reached a climax in the Marseillaise, Derry rose,
thrilled, to his feet.

She whirled around and faced him.  "They all do that," she said, with a
glowing air Of triumph.  "It's when I get them."

"Why did you give the Marseillaise last?"

"It has the tramp in it of marching men--I love it."

"But why not the 'Star Spangled Banner'?"

"That's for sacred moments.  I hate to make it common--but I'll sing
it--now--"

Still standing, he listened.  Drusilla held her voice to that low note,
but there was the crash of battle in the music that she made, the hush
of dawn, the cry of victory--

"Dear girl, you are a genius."

"No, I am not.  But I can feel things--and I can make others feel--"

She rose and went to the window.  "There's a new moon," she said, "come
and see--"

The curtains were not drawn, and the apartment was high up, so that
they looked out beyond the hills to a sky in which the daylight blue
had faded to a faint green, and saw the little moon and one star.

"Derry," Drusilla said, softly.  "Derry, why aren't you fighting?"

It was the question he had dreaded.  He had seen it often in her eyes,
but never before had she voiced it.

"I can't tell you, Drusilla, but there's a reason--a good one.  God
knows I would go if I could."

The passion in his voice convinced her.

"Don't you know I'd be in it if I had my way.  But I've got to stay on
the shelf like the tin soldier in the fairy tale.  Do you remember,
Drusilla?  And people keep asking me--why?"

"I shouldn't have asked it, Derry?"

"You couldn't know.  And you had a right to ask--everybody has a
right--and I can't answer."

She laid her hand on his shoulder.  "When I was a little girl," she
said, softly, "I used to cry--because I was so sorry for the--tin
soldier--"

"Are you sorry for me, Drusilla?"

"Dreffly sorry."

They stood in silence among the shadows, with only the red candles
burning.  Then Derry said, heartily, "You are the best friend that a
fellow ever had, Drusilla."

And that was as far as he would play the game!




CHAPTER IV

THE QUESTION

Whatever else might be said of General Drake, his Bacchanalian
adventures were those of a gentleman.  Not for him were the sinister
streets and the sordid taverns of the town.  When his wild moods came
upon him, he struck out straight for open country.  Up hill and down
dale he trudged, a knight of the road, finding shelter and refreshment
at wayside inns, or perchance at some friendly farm.

The danger lay in the lawless folk whom he might meet on the way.
Unshaven and unshorn he met them, travelling endlessly along the
railroad tracks, by highways, through woodland paths.  They slept by
day and journeyed by night.  By reversing this program, the General as
a rule avoided them.  But not always, and when the little lad Derry had
followed his strange quests, he had come now and then upon his father,
telling stories to an unsavory circle, lord for the mo