Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive/American
Libraries.)









    THE
    WRITING OF NEWS

    A HANDBOOK

    WITH CHAPTERS ON NEWSPAPER
    CORRESPONDENCE AND COPY READING

    BY
    CHARLES G. ROSS

    ASSISTANT PROFESSOR OF JOURNALISM IN THE UNIVERSITY OF MISSOURI

    NEW YORK
    HENRY HOLT AND COMPANY




    COPYRIGHT, 1911,

    BY
    HENRY HOLT AND COMPANY

    _Published November, 1911_

    PRINTED IN THE U. S. A.




    TO
    MY MOTHER




PREFACE


In preparing this volume the author has had in mind the needs not only
of students in schools of journalism, but of others who may desire a
concise statement of the principles that govern the art of news writing
as practiced by the American newspaper. It is hoped the book will prove
helpful either as a laboratory guide in the school room or as a text
book for home use.

As the title indicates, the book deals with one phase of journalism,
the presentation of the news story, more especially with the writing
of the story--the reporter’s part in the day’s work. No attempt has
been made to go into other aspects of journalism--the writing of
editorials, the administrative features of the work, the delicate
adjustment that every newspaper must make between its business and news
departments--except in so far as they bear directly upon the subject in
hand.

The term journalism is broadly used here to mean all branches of
newspaper endeavor. In common with other newspaper men, the author
admits an aversion to the word as restricted to the working field
of the men who get and write the news. They call themselves not
journalists, but reporters or newspaper men. It is for newspaper men
and women in the making that the book is primarily designed.

The nature of newspaper work makes it impossible to formulate an
all-sufficing series of rules by which the news writer shall invariably
be guided. But there are certain well-defined principles, largely
technical, that set apart the news story as a distinct form of
composition, and these the author has tried to put down simply and
concisely--after the fashion of the news story itself. Going beyond
the common practice, there is wide divergence among newspapers in the
details of “office style.” Methods peculiar to the individual paper can
readily be acquired by one grounded in the essentials of the craft;
hence only the more significant points of departure from the generally
accepted practice have been noted.

Practically all the examples in the book are from published news
stories, reproduced in most cases exactly as they appeared in print.
In some, for obvious reasons, fictitious names and addresses have been
substituted for the real. With one or two exceptions the examples
illustrating right methods of news presentation have been chosen not
for special brilliancy, but as fairly showing the everyday output of
the trained news writer.

    University of Missouri,
    Columbia,
    July, 1911.




CONTENTS


    CHAPTER                                                    PAGE

       I. NEWSPAPER COPY
            Terminology--Directions for Preparing
            Copy                                                  1

      II. THE ENGLISH OF THE NEWSPAPERS
            Clearness--Conciseness--Force                         7

     III. THE WRITER’S VIEWPOINT
            Fairness--Impersonality--Good Taste--Originality     17

      IV. THE IMPORTANCE OF ACCURACY
            In Observation--In Names--In Street
            Addresses--In Spelling                               30

       V. NEWS VALUES
            The Reporter--What Is News?--The
            Newspaper’s Problem--Kinds of Stories                41

      VI. WRITING THE LEAD
            What the Lead Is--What the Lead Should
            Contain--Observance of Style--Leads to
            Be Avoided--Sentence Structure--Leads
            That Begin With Names--The General
            Rule--Study of 100 Typical Stories                   57

     VII. THE STORY PROPER
            Compression and Expansion--The Mechanics
            of the Story                                         79

    VIII. THE FEATURE STORY
            What the Feature Story Is Not--Stories
            for Entertainment--The Human-Interest
            Story--The Editor’s Problem--Sunday
            Magazine Stories                                     98

      IX. THE INTERVIEW
            When the Interview Is Incidental--When
            the Interview Is the Story                          113

       X. SPECIAL TYPES OF STORIES
            Stories of Fires--Deaths--Weddings--Crimes--
            Business--Second-Day Stories--Rewriting             129

      XI. THE CORRESPONDENT
            Writing for the Wire--Some Pitfalls to
            Be Avoided--What Not to Send--What
            to Send--Sporting News--How to Send--Handling
            the Big Story--Sending by
            Mail--General Instructions--Payment                 150

     XII. COPY READING
            Qualifications for the Work--Organization
            of Copy Readers--Editing the Story--Rules
            About Libel--The Guide Line--Marks
            Used in Editing--Additions and
            Insertions--The Lighter Side--The Copy
            Reader’s Schedule                                   171

    XIII. WRITING THE HEAD
            First Requisites of the Head--Definiteness--The
            Question of Tense--The Mechanics
            of the Head--Some Things to Avoid--Symmetry
            and Sense--Special Kinds of
            Heads--Capitalization                               193

     XIV. DON’TS FOR THE NEWS WRITER                            211

      XV. NEWSPAPER BROMIDES                                    224

          INDEX                                                 231




THE WRITING OF NEWS




    ... But however great a gift, if news instinct as born were
    turned loose in any newspaper office in New York without the
    control of sound judgment bred by considerable experience
    and training, the results would be much more pleasing to the
    lawyers than to the editor. One of the chief difficulties in
    journalism now is to keep the news from running rampant over
    the restraints of accuracy and conscience. And if a “nose for
    news” is born in the cradle, does not the instinct, like other
    great qualities, need development by teaching, by training, by
    practical object-lessons illustrating the good and the bad, the
    right and the wrong, the popular and the unpopular, the things
    that succeed and the things that fail, and above all the things
    that deserve to succeed, and the things that do not--not the
    things only that make circulation for to-day, but the things
    that make character and influence and public confidence?--From
    an article by JOSEPH PULITZER in the _North American Review_.




THE WRITING OF NEWS

CHAPTER I

NEWSPAPER COPY

    This is the age of the reporter--the age of news, not views.
    We are influencing our public through the presentation of
    facts; and the gathering, the assembling and the presentation
    of these facts is the work of the reporter. There are two
    ideals of news. The first is to give the news colorless, the
    absolute truth. The second is to take the best attitude for
    the perpetuation of our democracy. The first would be all
    right if there were such a thing as absolute truth. When
    jesting Pilate asked, “What is truth?” he expressed the eternal
    question of modern journals. The best we can do is to follow
    the second ideal, which is to point out the truth as seen from
    the broadest, the most human and the most interesting point
    of view.--From an address by WILL IRWIN at the University of
    Missouri.


TERMINOLOGY

All manuscript for the press is _copy_. _Clean copy_ is manuscript
that requires little or no editing. The various steps in the gathering
and writing of news that precede printing are indicated briefly in the
following explanation of newspaper terms:

=Story.=--Any article prepared for a newspaper. A three-line item
and a three-column account of a convention are both, in the newspaper
sense, _stories_. The term is applied also to the happening with which
the story deals. Thus a reporter sent to get the facts about a fire is
said to be _covering_ a fire story. A happening of unusual importance
makes a _big_ news story. Reporters are _assigned_ or _detailed_ by
the city editor to cover certain stories, and the task given each is
his _assignment_. A reporter assigned to visit certain definite places
which are covered regularly in the search for news (as police stations,
hospitals, courts, fire headquarters, city hall, etc.) is said to have
a _run_ or a _beat_. A reporter _scoops_ competing news gatherers when
he gets an exclusive story. The story is called a _scoop_ or a _beat_.

=Stickful.=--A term frequently used in defining the length of a
story. A _stickful_ is about two inches of type--the amount held by a
composing _stick_, a metal frame used by the printer in setting type by
hand.

=Lead.=--Loosely used to indicate the introduction, usually the first
paragraph, of the story. In the ordinary sense the news story has no
such thing as an introduction. The _lead_ goes straight to the point
without preliminaries. Do not confuse this word, pronounced “leed,”
with the word of the same spelling pronounced “led.” The latter word
_lead_, as a verb, is an order to the printer to put thin strips of
metal (_leads_) between the lines of the story in type, thus giving
additional white space and making the story stand out more prominently
on the printed page. Editorials are usually _leaded_.

=Copy Reader.=--A sub-editor who puts the copy into shape for the
printer and writes the headlines. Sometimes called _copy editor_. Do
not confuse _copy reading_ with _proofreading_ (the correction of proof
sheets), which is done in another department.

=Slug.=--A solid line of machine-set type. As used by the copy
reader, the term usually means the identifying name given a story, as
“wedding,” “fire,” “wreck.” A story is _slugged_ when it is so named
for convenience in keeping tab on it.

=Head.=--Abbreviation for _headlines_. A copy reader is said to _build
a head_ on a certain feature of the story.

=Feature.=--Noun: The most interesting part of a story is the
_feature_. Verb: A story is _featured_ or _played up_ when it is
prominently displayed. Adjective: A _feature story_ usually depends for
its interest on some other element than that of immediate news value.

=Make up.=--Verb: To arrange the type in forms for printing. Noun
(_make-up_): The process of arranging the type or the result as
seen in the printed page. A newspaper is said to have an effective
_make-up_ when the disposition of the stories on a page and the general
typographical appearance of the whole contribute toward making the
desired impression on the reader. The _make-up editor_ supervises the
work of making up. A page may be _made over_ to insert late news.


DIRECTIONS FOR PREPARING COPY

Most newspapers insist on typewritten copy; all prefer it. It can
be prepared more quickly than long-hand copy after one has mastered
the use of the machine; it makes for accuracy; it is easier to edit,
and, because of its uniform legibility, it saves time and expense in
type-setting.

Adjust your typewriter to leave two or three spaces between lines, so
that legible interlining in long-hand will be possible. Closely written
copy is the abomination of the copy reader, compelling him to cut and
paste in order to make corrections.

Never write on both sides of the paper. Never fasten sheets of copy
together.

Write your name in the upper left-hand corner of the first page. Number
each page.

Begin the story about the middle of the first page, the space at the
top being left for writing in the headlines.

Don’t crowd the page with writing. Leave a margin of an inch to an
inch and a half at each side. Leave an inch at top and bottom for
convenience in pasting sheets together.

Avoid dividing words. Never divide a word from one page to another.

In writing a story in short “takes,” or installments, make each page
end with a sentence.

Indent for a paragraph about a third the width of the page.

In making corrections it is usually safer to cross out and rewrite. Be
particularly careful about names and figures.

Letter inserted pages. For example, between pages 3 and 4, the inserted
pages should be designated 3a, 3b, etc.

Use an end-mark to show the story has been completed. The figures 30 in
a circle may be used.

Use every effort to make long-hand copy easily legible. Overscore
n and o and underscore u and a when there is any possibility of
confusion. Print proper names and unusual words. Draw a small circle
around periods or use a small cross instead.

Draw a circle around an abbreviation to show it is to be spelled out.
To make sure a letter will be set as a capital draw three lines under
it.

If there is a chance that a word intentionally misspelled, as in
dialect, will be changed by the printer or the proofreader, draw a
circle around the word, run a line to the margin and there write
“Follow copy.”

Unless you are pressed for time, read over your story carefully before
turning it in.

Accuracy is the first essential of news writing. Above all, _watch
names_.




CHAPTER II

THE ENGLISH OF THE NEWSPAPERS

    Of the three generally recognized qualities of good
    style--clarity, force and grace--it is the last and the
    last alone in which critics of newspaper English find their
    material. It would be ludicrously superfluous to illustrate
    here the prevailing clearness of what one reads in the daily
    press. To it everything else is sacrificed. He who runs through
    the pages of his paper at a speed that keeps even pace with
    that of his car or train, and yet understands what he reads,
    without difficulty and without delay, would give short hearing
    to a complaint on this score. The same assertion may safely
    be made of the second of the trio of good qualities. Whenever
    and wherever force is needed, the reporter, no matter what his
    limitations of time and distracting circumstances, manages to
    put it into his writing.

    The result is plain--and inevitable. Beauty, grace, suggestion
    of that final touch which confers upon its object the
    immortality of perfect art, are nearly always conspicuously
    absent. We know at a glance what has happened and we get
    the force of whatever significance the writer has wished
    to impress, but it is all hurled at our heads in the same
    wholesale fashion, with the same neglect of “form,” that the
    genuine American is accustomed to in his quick-lunch resort,
    and, in his heart, really likes.... Without intending to
    be dogmatic about it, we are inclined to say that, if a
    newspaper’s English makes a fair approach to the level of an
    educated, intelligent man’s serious conversation, it will
    be doing about all that can justly be expected. Whatever
    it accomplishes more than this is to its credit.--From an
    editorial in the New York _Evening Post_.


“Newspaper English” has often been used as a term of reproach, as if
the newspapers, by concerted action, had been guilty of creating an
inferior, trademarked brand of English for their own purposes. The term
has been hurled indiscriminately at all newspapers, the good as well as
the bad, and young writers have been warned in a vague, general way to
beware of the reporter’s style. As applied to loosely edited newspapers
the criticism is just. It is not true, however, that “newspaper
English” constitutes a special variety of language, to be shunned by
all who would attain purity in writing. There are good books and bad
books, just as there are good newspapers and bad newspapers, and it
would be as reasonable to condemn all books because they are written in
a “bookish” style as it is to include all news writing in a sweeping
condemnation.

No defense is needed of the style of writing in the well-edited modern
newspaper. Free from pedantry and obsolete expressions, the English of
the best newspapers fulfills its purpose of telling the news of the day
in language that all can understand. Newspaper English has not been
created by the newspapers alone. It is the language of the people,
clarified and simplified in the writing, as opposed to the language
of an earlier day which obscured the writer’s thought in a maze of
high-sounding words. Newspaper English, at its best, is nothing more
nor less than good English employed in the setting forth of news. At
its worst it embodies the common faults of writing.

The reporter writes his story for readers of all degrees of
intelligence--for the man whose only reading is newspapers and for the
man of cultivated taste. Simplicity is the keynote. This does not mean
crudity or slovenliness, for while the good news story is written with
the limitations of the least intelligent reader in mind, it should not
offend the educated reader. In this respect the Bible, the simplest of
all books, is an excellent model for the news writer.

In keeping with its essential simplicity of style, the good news story
is clear, concise and forceful.


CLEARNESS

Simplicity of structure and diction implies clearness. The story
that would appeal to the masses defeats its purpose if not readily
intelligible. The average newspaper reader has neither time nor
inclination to puzzle over an involved sentence or to consult a
glossary for the definition of a technical phrase.

Scientific terms, if not in general use, should be translated into
everyday English. This is true also of legal phraseology and other
words and expressions of purely technical meaning. Let your story
explain itself. If Mrs. Jones got a divorce, say so; don’t confuse the
reader with the verbiage of the courts. Get as close to the speech
of the people as good taste and correctness will allow. Vulgar and
silly slang is not tolerated by the good newspaper, but an expressive
colloquialism may be used to avoid pedantry.

In striving for simplicity and clarity beware of dullness. “Fine
writing”--the kind that speaks of a barber shop as a “tonsorial
parlor”--has no place in the modern newspaper office, but there is
a demand for the writer who can infuse freshness and vigor into his
story. The style of your story should be simple, its meaning clear and
its diction pure. Try also to give it that element of originality and
charm that distinguishes the best writing from merely good writing.
Newspaper English, as used by skillful writers, displays often, in its
well-turned phrases, its quick description and its “featuring” of the
leading facts, the touch of the true artist. For all this the story is
none the less, in the manner of its telling, simple and clear.


CONCISENESS

“Boil it down” is an injunction frequently heard in the newspaper
office. The requirements both of the public and of the newspaper demand
that the story be concisely told. The hurried reader has no time for
the story clogged with unnecessary words and trivial detail; the
newspaper has no space for it.

Daily there comes to the newspaper a stream of copy from various
sources. The local room contributes its share, while the telegraph
editor receives scores of dispatches from special correspondents,
besides the regular service of one of the great news gathering
organizations. It would be neither possible nor desirable to print all
of the immense amount of news matter received. The paper as the reader
sees it is the result of a process of careful selection. Many stories
have been omitted, some of them having been “killed” after progressing
as far as the type forms, and others have been “boiled down” to a few
sentences.

The news writer, then, should study to be terse. Verbosity merely makes
work for the copy reader’s pencil. Try to say in one word what the
writer who strains after effect might put into half a dozen. Don’t say
“devouring element” when you mean “fire.” “Fire” is a good Anglo-Saxon
word that everybody understands and uses--and it is twelve letters
shorter. “A house is building” is simpler, shorter and more effective
than “A house is in process of construction.” “The society met last
night and elected officers for the year” is the simple, natural
equivalent of “At a meeting held last night the society perfected its
organization for the year by the election of officers.”

Wordiness, like bad spelling, is a sign of mental laziness, and the
newspaper office has no room for the lazy.


FORCE

Force grows out of simplicity, clearness, terseness of style. The story
told in plain, curt phrase is more effective than the story which shows
a conscious striving after effect. Diction is important. A strong word
lends strength to an entire sentence, while a weak word may spoil the
vividness of an impression. As a rule the words that are deeply rooted
in everyday speech are stronger than their synonyms of foreign origin.
Words derived from the Anglo-Saxon are the bone and sinew of the
language. The writer who neglects them for the longer and often more
euphonious words from the Latin may add elegance to his style, but he
takes away from its power to impress. The reader feels the difference,
though he may not be able to explain it.

Brevity as well as force favors the Anglo-Saxon. “Begin” is shorter
than “commence.” It is a better word for the news writer. Likewise
it is better to say “A movement was begun” than “A movement was
inaugurated.” The latter is a word in good standing--presidents are
inaugurated--but let it be confined to its proper use. “Build” is
preferable to “construct” when the words may be used interchangeably.
Examples might be multiplied, but in the end the writer must rely on
his own judgment of word-values, sharpened by a study of good writing.

This rule may be formulated: _In seeking force, choose the Anglo-Saxon
word instead of its foreign equivalent unless clearness demands the
latter._

The active voice is usually more forcible than the passive. “Jones
succeeds Smith” and “A house is building” are better news sentences
for this reason than “Smith is succeeded by Jones” and “A house is
being built.”

Short sentences, unless they become monotonous, are preferable to long.
The speed with which stories are put together in the newspaper office,
especially when the writer is working to “catch an edition,” is one
factor that makes news writing forcible. Working under pressure, the
reporter writes with a nervous, hurried energy that makes for short
sentences and quick, telling phrases. He has no time for involved
construction and prettiness of language. His aim is to “feature” the
big facts of the story--to put what he calls a “punch” into the lead.
What such a story lacks in elegance it makes up in force.


SUGGESTIONS FOR HOME OR CLASS-ROOM STUDY

I.--A good news story, illustrating especially the virtue of
conciseness:

    CHICAGO, Nov. 5.--“It is hard to give away money,” declared
    James A. Patten, retired Board of Trade operator, at a Y. M. C.
    A. meeting last night at Evanston. “A person must acquire the
    habit,” he added. “After that it comes easy.”

    Then he gave the Evanston association $25,000, with the
    condition that it raise an additional $75,000 within the next
    ten days. The meeting opened a campaign for raising a fund of
    $100,000.

(Note in the foregoing the effective use of direct quotation.)

II.--Simplicity of form and diction adds to the force of the following
news dispatch:

    LONDON, Nov. 5.--Dr. Hawley H. Crippen, convicted of the murder
    of his wife, Belle Elmore, the actress, to-day played his last
    card and lost. He will be hanged on November 8.

    Changed as he was physically, Crippen maintained his composure
    even in the trying moment when he heard his doom pronounced.
    At once the Court’s decision was announced, a warden touched
    the prisoner on the shoulder and the latter, without a word or
    gesture, turned and left the dock. He was conducted at once to
    Pentonville Prison.

    Those who have seen Crippen during his imprisonment say that
    his bearing has never changed from the moment of his arrest.
    He sleeps throughout the night soundly and eats heartily. He
    spends much time in reading. Miss Leneve has visited him in the
    prison three times.

(All the salient facts of the story are summed up in the opening
paragraph. Note the use of metaphor--“played his last card and lost.”
Touches such as this lift a story above the commonplace. Note, too,
that no attempt is made at so-called “fine writing.”)

III.--Rewrite the following:

    Within three hours after a “ten spot” had been deposited with
    Chief of Police William Smith as a reward to the patrolman
    arresting one Fred Wilson, charged with the larceny of a coat
    and a pair of shoes from J. W. Morris at a South street rooming
    house, said Fred Wilson was resting his tired body within the
    confines of the city bastile.

    Morris left the reward and a description of the man who, he
    said, had taken the articles. Each policeman was given the
    description and told to look out for the man. It fell to
    Officer John Haden at the Frisco Depot to garner the loose
    change by collaring Wilson and taking him to headquarters. He
    had the shoes and coat in his possession at the time and told
    Haden that he had merely put them on to wear for a little while.

    It is believed that he was preparing to leave Smithton for
    another haven when arrested.

(The foregoing is a sample of “fine writing.” Why not say $10 or “a
ten-dollar bill” instead of “ten spot”? “Charged with stealing” is
shorter and more to the point than the technical expression, “charged
with the larceny of.” “Within the confines of the city bastile”
evidently means “in the city jail.” Other violations of good news style
will be apparent after a moment’s thought. When in doubt ask yourself:
How would I say this if I were relating the incident in conversation?
Then write it that way. Be natural.)




CHAPTER III

THE WRITER’S VIEWPOINT

    Newspaper work is an exacting profession, because things a
    journalist has done do not count. Like a hen he must lay an
    entirely new egg every day.--From an address by ARTHUR BRISBANE
    at Columbia University, New York.

    As many changes have come in recent years in country journalism
    as in any other line of human endeavor.... The pronoun “we”
    has been banished from the editorial and news columns, and
    the “slop” and “hog wash” known as “puffs”--that is, fulsome
    compliment and paid-for flattery--has become obsolete.--From an
    editorial in the Fulton (Mo.) _Gazette_.

    The three notes of modern reporting are clarity, terseness,
    objectivity. The news writer of to-day aims to tell a story
    that shall be absolutely intelligible, even to minds below
    the average--since everybody reads; to economize space to the
    last degree, and to keep himself, his prejudices, preferences,
    opinions, out of the story altogether.--From an editorial in
    the St. Louis _Republic_.


The news writer is the agent of the paper that employs him. As such,
in a wider sense he is the agent of the public, which relies on the
newspaper to keep it informed of the day’s happenings. The story is the
all-important thing; the reader as a rule cares nothing about who wrote
it or what the writer thinks of it. The viewpoint of the news writer
must be that of the unprejudiced, but alert, observer. He must approach
his story with a mind open to the facts and he must record the facts
unvarnished by his own preferences and opinions. Comment on the news
of the day is the function of the editorial columns. It has no place
in the news story. The writer who willfully injects his own likes and
dislikes into the story breaks faith with his employer, whose space he
is using, and with the public that buys the paper.

The ideal news story, apart from questions of style, has these
qualities:

1. It is written without prejudice. It is fair, both in spirit and in
detail.

2. It is written from an impersonal, objective viewpoint.

3. It is written in good taste.

4. It has originality.


FAIRNESS

In writing your story remember always that it will be read not merely
by a circle of men and women of your own tastes and opinions, but by
persons of all classes, of all races, of dozens of different shades
of religious and political belief. The daily press is the popular
university. Protestant, Catholic and Jew look to it for information;
it sets the standard of English for the masses; for many it is the only
reading. The tremendous influence of the press imposes an obligation on
the news writer. His story must be simple and direct, so that all can
understand; more important still, it must be fair.

Approach every story in a spirit of open-mindedness, remembering that
nearly every question has two or more sides. Tell the facts and let
the reader draw his own conclusions. Tell all the facts essential to a
clear understanding of the story. A story may be true in detail and yet
work an injustice by omission. Let your story be fair in detail and in
the impression it leaves.

Even aside from the ethical obligation, business reasons demand
fairness. No paper can afford to offend a large group of readers by a
slighting reference to a race or a religious sect. Call the races by
their right names. Words such as “Dago” are forbidden by fairness, by
good taste and by business policy.

Before making a damaging statement about a person, be sure you have
legal evidence in which there is no loophole. Hesitate even then--go to
the city editor for instruction. If you are a correspondent, let your
office know the facts--all the facts. Bear in mind that homicide is not
necessarily murder. There is grave danger, no matter how convincing the
evidence may appear to be, in calling a person a murderer before he has
been so branded by the courts. If he is acquitted he has ground for a
libel suit against the newspaper that has charged him with crime.


IMPERSONALITY

News writing is objective to the last degree, in the sense that the
writer is not allowed to “editorialize.” He must leave himself out of
the story. True, he may give it, in his way of telling the facts, a
certain individuality and power, but he is not permitted to cross the
border line between the strict presentation of news and the editorial.
Only writers whose stories are signed are allowed to use the capital I.
They are the exceptions in modern newspaper making. The average news
writer, however brilliant his work, receives only the commendation of
his fellows. It is for this he strives, and the satisfaction that comes
of work well done, rather than for public recognition. Always in the
middle of things, close to history in the making,--and that is one of
the fascinations of the “game”--the newspaper man must yet remain in
the background. The story is the big, the vital thing. In it, for the
time being, he is willing to sink his personality.

The age of personal journalism in its old sense has passed. In the
new era the writer’s personality counts for just as much, or more,
but he must use it wholly as an instrument belonging to his newspaper
and the public. It is not meant by this that he must work always by
rule and line, but that he must refrain from coloring his story with
his personal prejudices and opinions. Even the “we” of the editorial
columns is fast being discarded for a more impersonal form. Most city
newspapers now avoid it altogether and the same tendency is seen in the
more enterprising country journals. It is still used in a large number
of papers published in the rural districts, both editorially and in the
news sections, but these are gossipy neighborhood chronicles rather
than newspapers in the modern understanding of the word.

Impersonal writing does not consist alone in the omission of “we”
and “I.” Avoid generalities that are likely to imply approval or
disapproval on the part of the writer. If Smith was killed by a
neighbor, tell when and where and how he was killed. Don’t generalize
by saying, “A dastardly crime was committed.” If your story is
pathetic it is not necessary to tell the reader so. Let him find it out
from the simple, human facts. In describing a pretty girl, don’t stop
with saying she is pretty; tell how she is pretty--tell the color of
her hair and eyes.

Strive always to be specific. With this in mind you are not likely to
stray far from the impersonal.


GOOD TASTE

Cultivate good taste in news writing, as in all kinds of writing. Your
story is read by the woman in the home as well as by the man on the
street. Leave out all revolting details and think twice before you use
a word or an expression of doubtful propriety. Good taste distinguishes
the story written carefully, with its possible effect on the reader’s
sensibilities in mind, from the story that runs recklessly into paths
avoided in conversation.

Never use cheap slang. One kind of slang, that which is clean-cut
and expressive, without taint of vulgarity, may afford a legitimate
short-cut in news writing as in speech. An expression of this type,
if it persists in the language, ultimately finds a place in the
dictionary. It is the other kind of slang, the vulgar or silly,
against which the news writer must be on his guard.

Horrible details are not wanted by the well-edited newspaper. Leave
out the three buckets of blood. The word “blood” in itself brings an
unpleasant picture before the reader and may shock a person of delicate
sensibilities. Most newspapers caution their writers against its
overuse.

Certain things are glossed over in our daily speech. This is true in
ever greater degree of the newspapers. Horace Greeley said that what
Providence permitted to happen he wasn’t too proud to report. That
is not the working principle of the modern newspaper, which omits
some things and edits others. The moral obligation of the newspaper
to its readers, as well as good taste, demands the pruning down of
some classes of news. “All the News That’s Fit to Print” implies this
obligation.

It is poor taste to attempt facetiousness in reporting a death. Never
call a body a “stiff.” Puns on the names of persons, unless they
are peculiarly apt or are justified by special circumstances, are
to be avoided. The same rule applies to exaggerated dialect put in
an offensive manner and to nicknames of the races. These instances
further illustrate the need of fairness and sanity in the writer’s
viewpoint. Common sense is an excellent guide in many of the delicate
little problems of this kind that crop up daily in every newspaper
office.


ORIGINALITY

Originality is the quality that gives a news story distinction. Rules
may aid, but the power to make a story original must come largely from
the writer himself. Many writers can put facts together into a coherent
whole. The highest rewards are reserved for those who can tell old
facts in a new way.

The main secret of original news writing lies in keeping the impression
fresh. Everything interests the new reporter. As he gains familiarity
with the work, there is danger that his viewpoint will become jaded.
Especially if he is covering the same run of news day after day must he
fight against this tendency to fall into a rut. The newspaper has no
use for the man in a rut. The reporter who becomes cynical loses the
news writer’s best asset, the power to feel the pathos or the injustice
or the humor of the thing he is writing about. If he himself cannot
feel his story he is not likely to impress the reader with it.

The newspaper workshop, unlike any other, must create something
different every day, although human nature, from which it gets its raw
materials, remains the same through the ages. There is no variation
from one day to another in the basic themes of the news, but there is
an endless variation in the local color, in the shadings of motive, in
all the details that go to make one story different from all others.
Take the story of death in a tenement house fire. There is the outline,
the basic fact, of stories without number; yet each story, told with
its wealth of human, moving detail, has the power to affect the reader
as if the theme itself were absolutely new. A dozen houses in the same
block look alike from the outside; yet the life that each conceals is
different from the life in all the others.

Here, then, is need for originality in the writing of news. If the
reporter’s outlook is cynical he is likely to overlook the human side
of the story for the lifeless skeleton of commonplace facts. His story
may be mechanically correct, but it has no power of appeal. Without
distorting a single fact, in plain, everyday words, the news writer may
tell a story of human suffering that will rouse his readers to generous
response. This he may do, not by editorial comment, but by putting the
facts in the most effective, which is usually the simplest, manner.
Editorial comment in such a story would weaken the effect. The facts,
properly told, are enough.

One word of caution perhaps should be given: In looking for the feature
do not descend to the trivial. To return to an illustration just used,
don’t write the lead of your fire story on the rescue of the family cat
and overlook the fact that human lives were lost. Originality does not
consist in straining after a feature at the expense of the vital things
in a story. Triviality comes with cynicism. The power to be truly
original, to put life into a story based on a commonplace theme, comes
with the broad, human sympathy that results from keeping the impression
ever fresh.


SUGGESTIONS FOR HOME OR CLASS-ROOM STUDY

I.--The following story, adapted from a newspaper, violates practically
every rule that can be laid down for the writing of news. Apart from
its errors of style, it is written with prejudice and in bad taste.
Rewrite the facts in half the present space, remembering (1) to be
fair; (2) to leave yourself out of the story; (3) to omit revolting
details; (4) to avoid “fine writing” and cheap slang.

    Tom Jones, one of Smithton’s worthless citizens, tried to
    shuffle off this mortal coil last Friday afternoon by cutting
    his throat with a pocket knife.

    It seems Jones had filed complaint against John Smith and
    Susie Williams for stealing. They were brought up in Justice
    Wagner’s court on Friday afternoon for trial, Jones being the
    prosecuting witness. When he was put upon the witness stand he
    flatly contradicted himself in statements made in his complaint
    to the Prosecuting Attorney. When he did this Mr. Brown at once
    dismissed the case against John Smith and Susie Williams and
    filed complaint against Jones for perjury, and put him under
    arrest. Constable Walker at once took him in charge and was
    preparing commitment papers, when Jones expressed a wish to
    go into the hall for a drink of water, which permission was
    given him by the constable. Soon after he had left the room
    an unusual noise was heard like the rushing of water and on
    investigation the man was found lying on the floor with his
    throat cut and the blood spurting like water from a fountain.
    He stuck the blade of an ordinary pocket knife into his throat
    and severed some of the arteries, and would probably have bled
    to death, except for the unfortunate arrival of a physician who
    stopped the blood, and he is now in a fair way to recover and
    may yet go over the road.

(“It seems” is unnecessary at the beginning of the second paragraph.
Instead of “tried to shuffle off this mortal coil” say simply that he
“tried to kill himself.” Cut out the grandiloquent phrases.)

II.--Note the stereotyped form of the following story, in which the
feature is obscured by a mass of routine detail. The story is as
lifeless as if it had been constructed by filling in blank spaces in
a set form. Although it has certain unusual elements, it is totally
lacking in originality of treatment:

    After he had been arrested on complaint of Henry Flannigan, 56
    years old, who conducts a repair shop at 1000 Center street,
    on a charge of stealing two revolvers from the shop Sunday
    afternoon, William Weaver, 18 years old, of 3445 Broadway,
    turned on the man and accused him of being a second Fagin, of
    running a fence and of having several small boys employed to
    steal goods for him.

    The police arrested Flannigan and his sons, Henry, Jr., aged
    15, and Fred, 14, at their home, 841 Division street, and Alex.
    Jones, 19, 1043 West avenue. Flannigan denied he was running a
    “fence” but admitted buying a lot of goods from the boys. They
    were locked up at the Fifteenth District Police Station.

(Query: Does the average reader understand what “running a fence”
means? Why not make this clear? It may be noted that some newspapers
insist that police stations be identified for the reader, not by their
numbers, but by the names of the streets on which they are situated.
Thus, in St. Louis, the Fourth District Station is called the Carr
Street Station; the Ninth, the Dayton Street Station, and so on. The
number, as a rule, means nothing to the reader, while the street name
gives him at once an idea of the locality.)

III.--In the following short feature story the writer has got away from
set forms and produced a readable story. Little stories of this type
are highly esteemed by newspapers with a leaning toward human-interest
news--especially if they are accompanied with pictures:

    CHICAGO, Nov. 7.--Stephen Rheim hit into a double play,
    although he didn’t know it for several days, when his safe
    hit won a game for the West Chicago High School baseball team
    over the Wheaton nine last June. In the grand stand was Miss
    Catherine Smith, also of West Chicago, and a loyal fan. “If he
    makes a hit I’ll marry him,” she cried, according to friends,
    as Rheim came to bat at a critical point in the game. After
    Rheim’s hit had won the game friends told him of Miss Smith’s
    remark and introduced him to the blushing young woman, who
    explained that she was “just joking.” But Rheim fell in love
    and remained there.




CHAPTER IV

THE IMPORTANCE OF ACCURACY

    The surest guarantee for right-doing in journalism is contained
    in the teaching that right is always right and that it must
    be done for its own sake. This is the great basic truth to be
    taught the students of schools of journalism and impressed
    upon the minds of all newspaper workers. No other “endowment”
    than this of sound principles is to be desired, either for
    newspapers or individuals, because both must work out their own
    salvation in life’s daily battle, which is won for the right
    only by those steadfast souls that fight for the sake of right
    alone.--From an editorial in the St. Louis _Post-Dispatch_.

    The haste and hurry of which so much is made may and does
    prevent polished work in a newspaper office. But it does not
    prevent accurate, careful, painstaking work. The history of
    the world which lay on your doorstep this morning is amazingly
    accurate; the mistakes in it are few and far between ... The
    average high school of to-day turns out a variety of English
    that the best natured city editor consigns to perdition in
    seven tongues, and beats out of the aspiring cub without
    delay or remorse. And in the important matter of brevity and
    directness of saying what you have to say in the curtest and
    plainest phrase of which the language is capable, the newspaper
    is the greatest educator in the world.--From an article by
    GEORGE L. KNAPP.


A first essential of good news writing is accuracy. The word should be
graven in the mind of every reporter and every editor. It is spoken
by the city editor to his reporters almost every hour of his working
day. Placards on the walls may call attention to it, as in some offices
where, with laudable brevity, the motto is urged upon the staff:

    ACCURACY
    TERSENESS
    ACCURACY

If a story is accurate, if it is written with a nice attention to
detail, it is likely to be fair. If a story is not accurate, it is not
news in the best sense.

Accuracy implies more than mere grammatical correctness. It means more
even than the stating of every fact with precision. A story may be
taken to pieces, fact by fact, and every sentence found to be correct;
yet the whole may give a false impression. Accuracy means the spirit as
well as the letter of the truth.


OBSERVATION

Truthful, precise writing is the fruit of accurate observation. If one
would write news, he must learn first to see news clearly and without
prejudice. Therein the trained reporter excels the casual observer. The
one has learned to observe keenly; the other, well equipped though
he may be in the rules of rhetoric, has not schooled himself in the
business of seeing things with an eye single to getting the facts in
right proportion. Learn to observe and you will have gone far toward
mastering the art of news getting and news writing. Casual observation
is nearly always faulty. Take for example the conflicting statements
of persons on the witness stand. One man, telling his version of an
automobile accident, swears the car was going fully thirty miles an
hour, another is certain the speed was only eight miles; one heard the
driver sound a warning “honk,” another is equally positive no warning
was given. Each witness is a reputable citizen and each thinks his
version is the truth. The discrepancy in their testimony is due, not to
any effort to deceive, but to the common failure to observe carefully.

It is the business of the newspaper man, whose eyes must serve
thousands of readers each day, to see rightly what others see
imperfectly or not at all. He is subject to the same human limitations
as the others, but he must make it his duty, by training his mind and
his eye, to reduce those limitations to the minimum. Then, and then
only, can he gather and write news with the maximum of efficiency.

In giving names and street addresses there is special need of accuracy.
Watch, too, the spelling of all the words in your copy. Remember the
dictionary is made for use.


NAMES

The average good citizen likes to see his name in print, but he is
deeply offended at seeing it misspelled. Smythe’s name is a thing
peculiarly his own; he can never cherish any particular regard for
the newspaper that persists in calling him Smith. So with Browne and
Maughs and Willson. Their names are not Brown, Moss, Wilson. A reader
whose name is misspelled feels, unconsciously perhaps, that he has
been robbed of some intimate possession. A blow has been aimed at his
individuality. To paraphrase a great reporter of life, his “good name”
has been stolen, and as a good citizen he resents the theft.

The misplacing of an initial or the careless dropping of a letter from
a name may cost the newspaper a subscriber. Certainly it convicts the
paper of inaccuracy in one man’s eyes. He reasons that if the paper is
mistaken in the spelling of his name, it may be guilty of other grave
inaccuracies in its news. His faith in the paper is shaken. And the
newspaper that loses the faith of its readers is in danger of losing
the good will that is its chief asset.


STREET ADDRESSES

Care should be taken in the writing of street addresses. The difference
between two street numbers may represent the difference between
respectability and its opposite. A serious injustice may be done a
person by printing his name with the wrong street address. Such a
mistake was made not long ago by a western newspaper, which gave an
address in a neighborhood of doubtful reputation to a citizen of high
standing. As a result of the writer’s carelessness the newspaper was
sued for libel.

The reporter should be constantly on his guard in taking down the
addresses given by unknown persons. Especially is this true with
reference to the data furnished by criminals for the police “blotter.”
It is a common practice of habitual criminals to give as their own the
addresses of reputable citizens.

Learn all you can of the city in which you work. Such knowledge will
be invaluable as a safeguard against many pitfalls. The city directory
is an excellent guide, but sometimes is inaccurate.


SPELLING

Spell correctly. This applies not alone to proper names. Some news
writers are prone to shift the burden of spelling to the man who edits
the copy or to the proofreader. Doubtless there are many brilliant news
gatherers who are deficient in spelling, but, other things being equal,
the man who spells correctly is preferred to him who is slovenly in
this respect. Bad spelling, though not fatal to a writer’s chances, is
often a sign of lazy habits of mind. The precise thinker, as a rule,
has too much regard for the tools of his trade--his words--to abuse
them. The city editor judges the new man largely by his copy. The
story that shows attention to spelling, to all the little niceties of
writing, assuredly has a better chance of a favorable reception than
the story, of equal news value, that betrays carelessness.


SUMMARY

If any hard-and-fast first principle relating to accuracy can be laid
down, it is this: _Get the names right._ Once this principle is
grounded in the mind of the reporter, he is fairly sure to strive for
accuracy in all the details of his story.

Persons who know nothing of the inner workings of the newspaper office
may profess to believe that stories are written without regard to
accuracy and are thrown into type haphazard, just