This etext was produced by David Widger





[NOTE: There is a short list of bookmarks, at the end of several of the
files for those who may wish to sample the author's ideas before making
an entire meal of them.  D.W.]





MEMOIRS OF NAPOLEON BONAPARTE, VOLUME 7.

By LOUIS ANTOINE FAUVELET DE BOURRIENNE

His Private Secretary

Edited by R. W. Phipps
Colonel, Late Royal Artillery

1891


CONTENTS:
CHAPTER XIX.  to  CHAPTER  XXVI.  1803-1804




CHAPTER XIX.

1803.

     Mr. Pitt--Motive of his going out of office--Error of the English
     Government--Pretended regard for the Bourbons--Violation of the
     treaty of Amiens--Reciprocal accusations--Malta--Lord Whitworth's
     departure--Rome and Carthage--Secret satisfaction of Bonaparte--
     Message to the Senate, the Legislative Body, and the Tribunate--
     The King of England's renunciation of the title of King of France--
     Complaints of the English Government--French agents in British ports
     --Views of France upon Turkey--Observation made by Bonaparte to the
     Legislative Body--Its false interpretation--Conquest of Hanover--
     The Duke of Cambridge caricatured--The King of England and the
     Elector of Hanover--First address to the clergy--Use of the word
     "Monsieur"--The Republican weeks and months.

One of the circumstances which foretold the brief duration of the peace
of Amiens was, that Mr. Pitt was out of office at the time of its
conclusion.  I mentioned this to Bonaparte, and I immediately perceived
by his hasty "What do you say?" that my observation had been heard--but
not liked.  It did not, however, require any extraordinary shrewdness to
see the true motive of Mr. Pitt's retirement.  That distinguished
statesman conceived that a truce under the name of a peace was
indispensable for England; but, intending to resume the war with France
more fiercely than ever, he for a while retired from office, and left to
others the task of arranging the peace; but his intention was to mark his
return to the ministry by the renewal of the implacable hatred he had
vowed against France.  Still, I have always thought that the conclusion
of peace, however necessary to England, was an error of the Cabinet of
London.  England alone had never before acknowledged any of the
governments which had risen up in France since the Revolution; and as the
past could not be blotted out, a future war, however successful to
England, could not take from Bonaparte's Government the immense weight it
had acquired by an interval of peace.  Besides, by the mere fact of the
conclusion of the treaty England proved to all Europe that the
restoration of the Bourbons was merely a pretext, and she defaced that
page of her history which might have shown that she was actuated by
nobler and more generous sentiments than mere hatred of France.  It is
very certain that the condescension of England in treating with the First
Consul had the effect of rallying round him a great many partisans of the
Bourbons, whose hopes entirely depended on the continuance of war between
Great Britain and France.  This opened the eyes of the greater number,
namely, those who could not see below the surface, and were not
previously aware that the demonstrations of friendship so liberally made
to the Bourbons by the European Cabinets, and especially by England, were
merely false pretences, assumed for the purpose of disguising, beneath
the semblance of honourable motives, their wish to injure France, and to
oppose her rapidly increasing power.

When the misunderstanding took place, France and England might have
mutually reproached each other, but justice was apparently on the side of
France.  It was evident that England, by refusing to evacuate Malta, was
guilty of a palpable infraction of the treaty of Amiens, while England
could only institute against France what in the French law language is
called a suit or process of tendency.  But it must be confessed that this
tendency on the part of France to augment her territory was very evident,
for the Consular decrees made conquests more promptly than the sword.
The union of Piedmont with France had changed the state of Europe.  This
union, it is true, was effected previously to the treaty of Amiens; but
it was not so with the states of Parma and Piacenza, Bonaparte having by
his sole authority constituted himself the heir of the Grand Duke,
recently deceased.  It may therefore be easily imagined how great was
England's uneasiness at the internal prosperity of France and the
insatiable ambition of her ruler; but it is no less certain that, with
respect to Malta, England acted with decidedly bad faith; and this bad
faith appeared in its worst light from the following circumstance:--
It had been stipulated that England should withdraw her troops from Malta
three months after the signing of the treaty, yet more than a year had
elapsed, and the troops were still there.  The order of Malta was to be
restored as it formerly was; that is to say, it was to be a sovereign and
independent order, under the protection of the Holy See.  The three
Cabinets of Vienna, Berlin, and St. Petersburg were to guarantee the
execution of the treaty of Amiens.  The English Ambassador, to excuse the
evasions of his Government, pretended that the Russian Cabinet concurred
with England in the delayed fulfilment of the conditions of the treaty;
but at the very moment he was making that excuse a courier arrived from
the Cabinet of St. Petersburg bearing despatches completely, at variance
with the assertion of Lord Whitworth.  His lordship left Paris on the
night of the 12th May 1803, and the English Government, unsolicited, sent
passports to the French embassy in London.  The news of this sudden
rupture made the English console fall four per cent., but did not
immediately produce such a retrograde effect on the French funds, which
were then quoted at fifty-five francs;--a very high point, when it is
recollected that they were at seven or eight francs on the eve of the
18th Brumaire.

In this state of things France proposed to the English Government to
admit of the mediation of Russia; but as England had declared war in
order to repair the error she committed in concluding peace, the
proposition was of course rejected.  Thus the public gave the First
Consul credit for great moderation and a sincere wish for peace.  Thus
arose between England and France a contest resembling those furious wars
which marked the reigns of King John and Charles VII.  Our beaux esprits
drew splendid comparisons between the existing state of things and the
ancient rivalry of Carthage and Rome, and sapiently concluded that, as
Carthage fell, England must do so likewise.

Bonaparte was at St. Cloud when Lord Whitworth left Paris.  A fortnight
was spent in useless attempts to renew negotiations.  War, therefore, was
the only alternative.  Before he made his final preparations the First
Consul addressed a message to the Senate, the Legislative Body, and the
Tribunate.  In this message he mentioned the recall of the English
Ambassador, the breaking out of hostilities, the unexpected message of
the King of England to his Parliament, and the armaments which
immediately ensued in the British ports.  "In vain," he said, "had France
tried every means to induce England to abide by the treaty.  She had
repelled every overture, and increased the insolence of her demands.
France," he added, "will not submit to menaces, but will combat for the
faith of treaties, and the honour of the French name, confidently
trusting that the result of the contest will be such as she has a right
to expect from the justice of her cause and the courage of her people."

This message was dignified, and free from that vein of boasting in which
Bonaparte so frequently indulged.  The reply of the Senate was
accompanied by a vote of a ship of the line, to be paid for out of the
Senatorial salaries.  With his usual address Bonaparte, in acting for
himself, spoke in the name of the people, just as he did in the question
of the Consulate for life.  But what he then did for his own interests
turned to the future interests of the Bourbons.  The very treaty which
had just been broken off gave rise to a curious observation.  Bonaparte,
though not yet a sovereign, peremptorily required the King of England to
renounce the empty title of King of France, which was kept up as if to
imply that old pretensions were not yet renounced.  The proposition was
acceded to, and to this circumstance was owing the disappearance of the
title of King of France from among the titles of the King of England,
when the treaty of Paris was concluded on the return of the Bourbons.

The first grievance complained of by England was the prohibition of
English merchandise, which had been more rigid since the peace than
during the war.  The avowal of Great Britain on this point might well
have enabled her to dispense with any other subject of complaint; for the
truth is, she was alarmed at the aspect of our internal prosperity, and
at the impulse given to our manufactures.  The English Government had
hoped to obtain from the First Consul such a commercial treaty as would
have proved a death-blow to our rising trade; but Bonaparte opposed this,
and from the very circumstance of his refusal he might easily have
foreseen the rupture at which he affected to be surprised.  What I state
I felt at the time, when I read with great interest all the documents
relative to this great dispute between the two rival nations, which
eleven years afterwards was decided before the walls of Paris.

It was evidently disappointment in regard to a commercial treaty which
created the animosity of the English Government, as that circumstance was
alluded to, by way of reproach, in the King of England's declaration.
In that document it was complained that France had sent a number of
persona into the ports of Great Britain and Ireland in the character of
commercial agents, which character, and the privileges belonging to it,
they could only have acquired by a commercial treaty.  Such was, in my
opinion, the real cause of the complaints of England; but as it would
have seemed too absurd to make it the ground of a declaration of war, she
enumerated other grievances, viz., the union of Piedmont and of the
states of Parma and Piacenza with France, and the continuance of the
French troops in Holland.  A great deal was said about the views and
projects of France with respect to Turkey, and this complaint originated
in General Sebastiani's mission to Egypt.  On that point I can take upon
me to say that the English Government was not misinformed.  Bonaparte too
frequently spoke to are of his ideas respecting the East, and his project
of attacking the English power in India, to leave any doubt of his ever
having renounced them.  The result of all the reproaches which the two
Governments addressed to each other was, that neither acted with good
faith.

The First Consul, in a communication to the Legislative Body on the state
of France and on her foreign relations; had said, "England, single-
handed, cannot cope with France."  This sufficed to irritate the
susceptibility of English pride, and the British Cabinet affected to
regard it as a threat.  However, it was no such thing.  When Bonaparte
threatened, his words were infinitely more energetic.  The passage above
cited was merely au assurance to France; and if we only look at the past
efforts and sacrifices made by England to stir up enemies to France on
the Continent, we may be justified in supposing that her anger at
Bonaparte's declaration arose from a conviction of its truth.  Singly
opposed to France, England could doubtless have done her much harm,
especially by assailing the scattered remnants of her navy; but she could
have done nothing against France on the Continent.  The two powers,
unaided by allies, might have continued long at war without any
considerable acts of hostility.

The first effect of the declaration of war by England was the invasion of
Hanover by the French troops under General Mortier.  The telegraphic
despatch by which this news was communicated to Paris was as laconic as
correct, and contained, in a few words, the complete history of the
expedition.  It ran as follows: "The French are masters of the Electorate
of Hanover, and the enemy's army are made prisoners of war."  A day or
two after the shop windows of the print-sellers were filled with
caricatures on the English, and particularly on the Duke of Cambridge.
I recollect seeing one in which the Duke was represented reviewing his
troops mounted on a crab.  I mention these trifles because, as I was then
living entirely at leisure, in the Rue Hauteville, I used frequently to
take a stroll on the Boulevards, where I was sometimes much amused with
these prints; and I could not help remarking, that in large cities such
triffles have more influence on the public mind than is usually supposed.

The First Consul thought the taking of the prisoners in Hanover a good
opportunity to exchange them for those taken from us by the English navy.
A proposition to this effect was accordingly made; but the English
Cabinet was of opinion that, though the King of England was also Elector
of Hanover, yet there was no identity between the two Governments, of
both which George III. was the head.  In consequence of this subtle
distinction the proposition for the exchange of prisoners fell to the
ground.  At this period nothing could exceed the animosity of the two
Governments towards each other, and Bonaparte, on the declaration of war,
marked his indignation by an act which no consideration can justify;
I allude to the order for the arrest of all the English in France--
a truly barbarious measure; for; can anything be more cruel and unjust
than to visit individuals with the vengeance due to the Government whose
subjects they may happen to be?  But Bonaparte, when under the influence
of auger, was never troubled by scruples.

I must here notice the fulfilment of a remark Bonaparte often made, use
of to me during the Consulate.  "You shall see, Bourrienne," he would
say," what use I will make of the priests."

War being declared, the First Consul, in imitation of the most Christian
kings of olden times, recommended the success of his arms to the prayers
of the faithful through the medium of the clergy.  To this end he
addressed a circular letter, written in royal style, to the Cardinals,
Archbishops, and Bishops of France.

It was as follows:

     MONSIEUR--The motives of the present war are known throughout
     Europe.  The bad faith of the King of England, who has violated his
     treaties by refusing to restore Malta to the order of St. John of
     Jerusalem, and attacked our merchant vessels without a previous
     declaration of war, together with the necessity of a just defence,
     forced us to have recourse to arms.  I therefore wish you to order
     prayers to be offered up, in order to obtain the benediction of
     Heaven on our enterprises.  The proofs I have received of your zeal
     for the public service give me an assurance of your readiness to
     conform with my wishes.

     Given at St. Cloud, 18 Prairial, an XI.  (7th June 1803).

                                        (Signed)  BONAPARTE.

This letter was remarkable in more than one respect.  It astonished most
of his old brothers-in-arms, who turned it into ridicule; observing that
Bonaparte needed no praying to enable him to conquer Italy twice over.
The First Consul, however, let them laugh on, and steadily followed the
line he had traced out.  His letter was admirably calculated to please
the Court of Rome, which he wished should consider him in the light of
another elder son of the Church.  The letter was, moreover, remarkable
for the use of the word "Monsieur," which the First Consul now employed
for the first time in an act destined for publicity.  This circumstance
would seem to indicate that he considered Republican designations
incompatible with the forms due to the clergy: the clergy were especially
interested in the restoration of monarchy.  It may, perhaps, be thought
that I dwell too much on trifles; but I lived long enough in Bonaparte's
confidence to know the importance he attached to trifles.  The First
Consul restored the old names of the days of the week, while he allowed
the names of the months, as set down in the Republican calendar, to
remain.  He commenced by ordering the Moniteur to be dated "Saturday,"
such a day of "Messidor."  "See," said he one day, "was there ever such
an inconsistency?  We shall be laughed at!  But I will do away with the
Messidor.  I will efface all the inventions of the Jacobins."

The clergy did not disappoint the expectations of the First Consul.  They
owed him much already, and hoped for still more from him.  The letter to
the Bishops, etc., was the signal for a number of circulars full of
eulogies on Bonaparte.

These compliments were far from displeasing to the First Consul, who had
no objection to flattery though he despised those who meanly made
themselves the medium of conveying it to him.  Duroc once told me that
they had all great difficulty in preserving their gravity when the cure
of a parish in Abbeville addressed Bonaparte one day while he was on his
journey to the coast.  "Religion," said the worthy cure, with pompous
solemnity, "owes to you all that it is, we owe to you all that we are;
and I, too, owe to you all that I am."

     --[Not so fulsome as some of the terms used a year later when
     Napoleon was made Emperor.  "I am what I am," was placed over a seat
     prepared for the Emperor.  One phrase, "God made Napoleon and then
     rested," drew from Narbonne the sneer that it would have been better
     if the Deity had rested sooner.  "Bonaparte," says Joseph de
     Maistre,  "has had himself described in his papers as the 'Messenger
     of God.'  Nothing more true.  Bonaparte comes straight from heaven,
     like a thunderbolt." (Saints-Benve, Caureries, tome iv. p. 203.)]




CHAPTER XX.

1803.

     Presentation of Prince Borghese to Bonaparte--Departure for Belgium
     Revival of a royal custom--The swans of Amiens--Change of formula
     in the acts of Government--Company of performers in Bonaparte's
     suite--Revival of old customs--Division of the institute into four
     classes--Science and literature--Bonaparte's hatred of literary men
     --Ducis--Bernardin de Saint-Pierre--Chenier and Lemercier--
     Explanation of Bonaparte's aversion to literature--Lalande and his
     dictionary--Education in the hands of Government--M. de Roquelaure,
     Archbishop of Malines.

In the month of April 1803 Prince Borghese, who was destined one day to
become Bonaparte's brother-in-law by marrying the widow of Leclerc, was
introduced to the First Consul by Cardinal Caprara.

About the end of June Bonaparte proceeded, with Josephine, on his journey
to Belgium and the seaboard departments.  Many curious circumstances were
connected with this journey, of which I was informed by Duroc after the
First Consul's return.  Bonaparte left Paris on the 24th of June, and
although it was not for upwards of a year afterwards that his brow was
encircled with the imperial-diadem, everything connected with the journey
had an imperial air.  It was formerly the custom, when the Kings of
France entered the ancient capital of Picardy, for the town of Amiens to
offer them in homage some beautiful swans.  Care was taken to revive this
custom, which pleased Bonaparte greatly, because it was treating him like
a King.  The swans were accepted, and sent to Paris to be placed in the
basin of the Tuileries, in order to show the Parisians the royal homage
which the First Consul received when absent from the capital.

It was also during this journey that Bonaparte began to date his decrees
from the places through which he passed.  He had hitherto left a great
number of signatures in Paris, in order that he might be present, as it
were, even during his absence, by the acts of his Government.  Hitherto
public acts had been signed in the name of the Consuls of the Republic.
Instead of this formula, he substituted the name of the Government of the
Republic.  By means of this variation, unimportant as it might appear,
the Government was always in the place where the First Consul happened to
be.  The two other Consuls were now mere nullities, even in appearance.
The decrees of the Government, which Cambaceres signed during the
campaign of Marengo, were now issued from all the towns of France and
Belgium which the First Consul visited during his six weeks' journey.
Having thus centred the sole authority of the Republic in himself, the
performers of the theatre of the Republic became, by a natural
consequence, his; and it was quite natural that they should travel in his
suite, to entertain the inhabitants of the towns in which he stopped by
their performances.  But this was not all.  He encouraged the renewal of
a host of ancient customs.  He sanctioned the revival of the festival of
Joan of Arc at Orleans, and he divided the Institute into four classes,
with the intention of recalling the recollection of the old academies,
the names of which, however, he rejected, in spite of the wishes and
intrigues of Suard and the Abby Morellet, who had gained over Lucien upon
this point.

However, the First Consul did not give to the classes of the Institute
the rank which they formerly possessed as academies.  He placed the class
of sciences in the first rank, and the old French Academy in the second
rank.  It must be acknowledged that, considering the state of literature
and science at that period, the First Consul did not make a wrong
estimate of their importance.

Although the literature of France could boast of many men of great
talent, such as La Harpe, who died during the Consulate, Ducis, Bernardin
de Saint-Pierre, Chenier, and Lemercier, yet they could not be compared
with Lagrange, Laplace, Monge, Fourcroy, Berthollet, and Cuvier, whose
labours have so prodigiously extended the limits of human knowledge.  No
one, therefore, could murmur at seeing the class of sciences in the
Institute take precedence of its elder sister.  Besides, the First Consul
was not sorry to show, by this arrangement, the slight estimation in
which he held literary men.  When he spoke to me respecting them he
called them mere manufacturers of phrases.  He could not pardon them for
excelling him in a pursuit in which he had no claim to distinction.
I never knew a man more insensible than Bonaparte to the beauties of
poetry or prose.  A certain degree of vagueness, which was combined with
his energy of mind, led him to admire the dreams of Ossian, and his
decided character found itself, as it were, represented in the elevated
thoughts of Corneille.  Hence his almost exclusive predilection for these
two authors With this exception, the finest works in our literature were
in his opinion merely arrangements of sonorous words, void of sense, and
calculated only for the ear.

Bonaparte's contempt, or, more properly speaking, his dislike of
literature, displayed itself particularly in the feeling he cherished
towards some men of distinguished literary talent.  He hated Chenier, and
Ducis still more.  He could not forgive Chenier for the Republican
principles which pervaded his tragedies; and Ducis excited in him; as if
instinctively, an involuntary hatred.  Ducis, on his part, was not
backward in returning the Consul's animosity, and I remember his writing
some verses which were inexcusably violent, and overstepped all the
bounds of truth.  Bonaparte was so singular a composition of good and bad
that to describe him as he was under one or other of these aspects would
serve for panegyric or satire without any departure from truth.
Bonaparte was very fond of Bernardin Saint-Pierre's romance of 'Paul and
Virginia', which he had read in his boyhood.  I remember that he one day
tried to read 'Les etudes de la Nature', but at the expiration of a
quarter of an hour he threw down the book, exclaiming, "How can any one
read such silly stuffy.  It is insipid and vapid; there is nothing in it.
These are the dreams of a visionary!  What is nature?  The thing is vague
and unmeaning.  Men and passions are the subjects to write about--there
is something there for study.  These fellows are good for nothing under
any government.  I will, however, give them pensions, because I ought to
do so, as Head of the State.  They occupy and amuse the idle.  I will
make Lagrange a Senator--he has a head."

Although Bonaparte spoke so disdainfully of literary men it must not be
taken for granted that he treated them ill.  On the contrary, all those
who visited at Malmaison were the objects of his attention, and even
flattery.  M. Lemercier was one of those who came most frequently, and
whom Bonaparte received with the greatest pleasure.  Bonaparte treated
M. Lemercier with great kindness; but he did not like him.  His character
as a literary man and poet, joined to a polished frankness, and a mild
but inflexible spirit of republicanism, amply sufficed to explain
Bonaparte's dislike.  He feared M. Lemercier and his pen; and, as
happened more than once, he played the part of a parasite by flattering
the writer.  M. Lemercier was the only man I knew who refused the cross
of the Legion of Honour.

Bonaparte's general dislike of literary men was less the result of
prejudice than circumstances.  In order to appreciate or even to read
literary works time is requsite, and time was so precious to him that he
would have wished, as one may say, to shorten a straight line.  He liked
only those writers who directed their attention to positive and precise
things, which excluded all thoughts of government and censures on
administration.  He looked with a jealous eye on political economists and
lawyers; in short, as all persons who in any way whatever meddled with
legislation and moral improvements.  His hatred of discussions on those
subjects was strongly displayed on the occasion of the classification of
the Institute.  Whilst he permitted the reassembling of a literary class,
to the number of forty, as formerly, he suppressed the class of moral and
political science.  Such was his predilection for things of immediate and
certain utility that even in the sciences he favoured only such as
applied to terrestrial objects.  He never treated Lalande with so much
distinction as Monge and Lagrange.  Astronomical discoveries could not
add directly to his own greatness; and, besides, he could never forgive
Lalande for having wished to include him in a dictionary of atheists
precisely at the moment when he was opening negotiations with the court
of Rome.

Bonaparte wished to be the sole centre of a world which he believed he
was called to govern.  With this view he never relaxed in his constant
endeavour to concentrate the whole powers of the State in the hands of
its Chief.  His conduct upon the subject of the revival of public
instruction affords evidence of this fact.  He wished to establish 6000
bursaries, to be paid by Government, and to be exclusively at his
disposal, so that thus possessing the monopoly of education, he could
have parcelled it out only to the children of those who were blindly
devoted to him.  This was what the First Consul called the revival of
public instruction.  During the period of my closest intimacy with him
he often spoke to me on this subject, and listened patiently to my
observations.  I remember that one of his chief arguments was this:
"What is it that distinguishes men?  Education--is it not?  Well, if the
children of nobles be admitted into the academies, they will be as well
educated as the children of the revolution, who compose the strength of
my government.  Ultimately they will enter into my regiments as officers,
and will naturally come in competition with those whom they regard as the
plunderers of their families.  I do not wish that!"

My recollections have caused me to wander from the journey of the First
Consul and Madame Bonaparte to the seabord departments and Belgium.
I have, however, little to add to what I have already stated on the
subject.  I merely remember that Bonaparte's military suite, and
Lauriston and Rapp in particular, when speaking to me about the journey,
could not conceal some marks of discontent on account of the great
respect which Bonaparte had shown the clergy, and particularly to M. de
Roquelaure, the Archbishop of Malines (or Mechlin).  That prelate, who
was a shrewd man, and had the reputation of having been in his youth more
addicted to the habits of the world than to those of the cloister, had
become an ecclesiastical courtier.  He went to Antwerp to pay his homage
to the First Consul, upon whom he heaped the most extravagant praises.
Afterwards, addressing Madame Bonaparte, he told her that she was united
to the First Consul by the sacred bonds of a holy alliance.  In this
harangue, in which unction was singularly blended with gallantry, surely
it was a departure from ecclesiastical propriety to speak of sacred bonds
and holy alliance when every one knew that those bonds and that alliance
existed only by a civil contract.  Perhaps M. de Roquelaure merely had
recourse to what casuists call a pious fraud in order to engage the
married couple to do that which he congratulated them on having already
done.  Be this as it may, it is certain that this honeyed language gained
M. de Roquelaure the Consul's favour, and in a short time after he was
appointed to the second class of the Institute.




CHAPTER XXI.

1804.

     The Temple--The intrigues of Europe--Prelude to the Continental
     system--Bombardment of Granville--My conversation with the First
     Consul on the projected invasion of England--Fauche Borel--Moreau
     and Pichegru--Fouche's manoeuvres--The Abbe David and Lajolais--
     Fouche's visit to St. Cloud--Regnier outwitted by Fouche--
     My interview with the First Consul--His indignation at the reports
     respecting Hortense--Contradiction of these calumnies--The brothers
     Faucher--Their execution--The First Consul's levee--My conversation
     with Duroc--Conspiracy of Georges, Moreau, and Pichegru--Moreau
     averse to the restoration of the Bourbons--Bouvet de Lozier's
     attempted suicide--Arrest of Moreau--Declaration of MM. de Polignac
     and de Riviere--Connivance of the police--Arrest of M. Carbonnet and
     his nephew.

The time was passed when Bonaparte, just raised to the Consulate, only
proceeded to the Temple to release the victims of the "Loi des suspects"
by his sole and immediate authority.  This state prison was now to be
filled by the orders of his police.  All the intrigues of Europe were in
motion.  Emissaries came daily from England, who, if they could not
penetrate into the interior of France, remained in the towns near the
frontiers, where they established correspondence, and published
pamphlets, which they sent to Paris by post, in the form of letters.

The First Consul, on the other hand, gave way, without reserve, to the
natural irritation which that power had excited by her declaration of
war.  He knew that the most effective war he could carry on against
England would be a war against her trade.

As a prelude to that piece of madness, known by the name of the
Continental system, the First Consul adopted every possible preventive
measure against the introduction of English merchandise.  Bonaparte's
irritation against the English was not without a cause.  The intelligence
which reached Paris from the north of France was not very consolatory.
The English fleets not only blockaded the French ports, but were acting
on the offensive, and had bombarded Granville.  The mayor of the town did
his duty, but his colleagues, more prudent, acted differently.  In the
height of his displeasure Bonaparte issued a decree, by which he bestowed
a scarf of honour on Letourneur, the mayor, and dismissed his colleagues
from office as cowards unworthy of trust.  The terms of this decree were
rather severe, but they were certainly justified by the conduct of those
who had abandoned their posts at s critical moment.

I come now to the subject of the invasion of England, and what the First
Consul said to me respecting it.  I have stated that Bonaparte never had
any idea of realising the pretended project of a descent on England.  The
truth of this assertion will appear from a conversation which I had with
him after he returned from his journey to the north.  In this
conversation he repeated what he had often before mentioned to me in
reference to the projects and possible steps to which fortune might
compel him to resort.

The peace of Amiens had been broken about seven months when, on the 15th
of December 1803, the First Consul sent for me to the Tuileries.  His
incomprehensible behaviour to me was fresh in my mind; and as it was
upwards of a year since I had seen him, I confess I did not feel quite at
ease when I received the summons.  He was perfectly aware that I
possessed documents and data for writing his history which would describe
facts correctly, and destroy the illusions with which his flatterers
constantly, entertained the public.  I have already stated that at that
period I had no intention of the kind; but those who laboured constantly
to incense him against me might have suggested apprehensions on the
subject.  At all events the fact is, that when he sent for me I took the
precaution of providing myself with a night-cap, conceiving it to be very
likely that I should be sent to sleep at Vincennes.  On the day appointed
for the interview Rapp was on duty.  I did not conceal from him my
opinion as to the possible result of my visit.  "You need not be afraid,"
said Rapp; "the First Consul merely wishes to talk with you."  He then
announced me.

Bonaparte came into the grand salon where I awaited him, and addressing
me in the most good-humoured way said, "What do the gossips say of my
preparations for the invasion of England?"--"There is a great difference
of opinion on the subject, General," I replied.  "Everyone speaks
according to his own views.  Suchet, for instance, who comes to see me
very often, has no doubt that it will take place, and hopes to give you
on the occasion fresh proofs of his gratitude and fidelity."--"But Suchet
tells me that you do not believe it will be attempted."--"That is true, I
certainly do not."--"Why?"--"Because you told me at Antwerp, five years
ago, that you would not risk France on the cast of a die--that the
adventure was too hazardous--and circumstances have not altered since
that time."--"You are right.  Those who look forward to the invasion of
England are blockheads.  They do not see the affair in its true light.
I can, doubtless, land in England with 100,000 men.  A great battle will
be fought, which I shall gain; but I must reckon upon 30,000 men killed,
wounded, and prisoners.  If I march on London, a second battle must be
fought.  I will suppose myself again victorious; but what should I do in
London with an army diminished three-fourths and without the hope of
reinforcements?  It would be madness.  Until our navy acquires
superiority it is useless to think of such a project.  The great
assemblage of troops in the north has another object.  My Government must
be the first in the world, or it must fall."  Bonaparte then evidently
wished it to be supposed that he entertained the design of invading
England in order to divert the attention of Europe to that direction.

From Dunkirk the First Consul proceeded to Antwerp, where also he had
assembled experienced men to ascertain their opinions respecting the
surest way of attempting a landing, the project of which was merely a
pretence.  The employment of large ships of was, after rang discussions,
abandoned in favour of a flotilla.

     --[At this period a caricature (by Gillray) appeared in London.
     which was sent to Paris, and strictly sought after by the police.
     One of the copies was shown to the First Consul, who was highly
     indignant at it.  The French fleet was represented by a number of
     nut-shells.  An English sailor, seated on a rock, was quietly
     smoking his pipe, the whiffs of which were throwing the whole
     squadron into disorder.--Bourrienne.  Gillray's caricatures should
     be at the reader's side during the perusal of this work, also
     English Caricature and Satire on Napoleon I., by J. Ashton Chatto:
     and Windus, 1884.]--

After visiting Belgium, and giving directions there, the First Consul
returned from Brussels to Paris by way of Maestricht, Liege, and
Soissons.

Before my visit to the Tuileries, and even before the rupture of the
peace of Amiens, certain intriguing speculators, whose extravagant zeal
was not less fatal to the cause of the Bourbons than was the blind
subserviency of his unprincipled adherents to the First Consul, had taken
part in some underhand manoeuvres which could have no favourable result.
Amongst these great contrivers of petty machinations the well-known
Fauche Borel, the bookseller of Neufchatel, had long been conspicuous.
Fauche Borel, whose object was to create a stir, and who wished nothing
better than to be noticed and paid, failed not to come to France as soon
as the peace of Amiens afforded him the opportunity.  I was at that time
still with Bonaparte, who was aware of all these little plots, but who
felt no personal anxiety on the subject, leaving to his police the care
of watching their authors.

The object of Fauche Borel's mission was to bring about a reconciliation
between Moreau and Pichegru.  The latter general, who was banished on the
18th Fructidor 4th (September 1797), had not obtained the First Consul's
permission to return to France.  He lived in England, where he awaited a
favourable opportunity for putting his old projects into execution.
Moreau was in Pains, but no longer appeared at the levees or parties of
the First Consul, and the enmity of both generals against Bonaparte,
openly avowed on the part of Pichegru; and still disguised by Moreau, was
a secret to nobody.  But as everything was prosperous with Bonaparte he
evinced contempt rather than fear of the two generals.  His apprehensions
were, indeed, tolerably allayed by the absence of the one and the
character of the other.  Moreau's name had greater weight with the army
than that of Pichegru; and those who were plotting the overthrow of the
Consular Government knew that that measure could not be attempted with
any chance of success without the assistance of Moreau.  The moment was
inopportune; but, being initiated in some secrets of the British Cabinet,
they knew that the peace was but a truce, and they determined to profit
by that truce to effect a reconciliation which might afterwards secure a
community of interests.  Moreau and Pichegru had not been friends since
Moreau sent to the Directory the papers seized in M. de Klinglin's
carriage, which placed Pichegru's treason in so clear a light.  Since
that period Pichegru's name possessed no influence over the minds of the
soldiers, amongst whom he had very few partisans, whilst the name of
Moreau was dear to all who had conquered under his command.

Fauche Borel's design was to compromise Moreau without bringing him to
any decisive step.  Moreau's natural indolence, and perhaps it may be
said his good sense, induced him to adopt the maxim that it was necessary
to let men and things take their course; for temporizing policy is often
as useful in politics as in war.  Besides, Moreau was a sincere
Republican; and if his habit of indecision had permitted him to adopt any
resolution, it is quite certain that he would not then have assisted in
the reestablishment of the Bourbons, as Pichegru wished.

What I have stated is an indispensable introduction to the knowledge of
plots of more importance which preceded the great event that marked the
close of the Consulship: I allude to the conspiracy of Georges, Cadoudal,
Moreau, and Pichegru, and that indelible stain on the character of
Napoleon,--the death of the Duc d'Enghien.  Different opinions have been
expressed concerning Georges' conspiracy.  I shall not contradict any of
them.  I will relate what I learned and what I saw, in order to throw
some light on that horrible affair.  I am far from believing what I have
read in many works, that it was planned by the police in order to pave
the First Consul's way to the throne.  I think that it was contrived by
those who were really interested in it, and encouraged by Fouche in order
to prepare his return to office.

To corroborate my opinion respecting Fouche's conduct and his manoeuvres
I must remind the reader that about the close of 1803 some persons
conceived the project of reconciling Moreau and Pichegru.  Fouche, who
was then out of the Ministry, caused Moreau to be visited by men of his
own party, and who were induced, perhaps unconsciously, by Fouche's art,
to influence and irritate the general's mind.  It was at first intended
that the Abbe David, the mutual friend of Moreau and Pichegru, should
undertake to effect their reconciliation; but he, being arrested and
confined in the Temple, was succeeded by a man named Lajolais, whom every
circumstance proves to have been employed by Fouche.  He proceeded to
London, and, having prevailed on Pichegru and his friends to return to
France, he set off to announce their arrival and arrange everything for
their reception and destruction.  Moreau's discontent was the sole
foundation of this intrigue.  I remember that one day, about the end of
January 1804, I called on Fouche, who informed me that he had been at St.
Cloud, where he had had a long conversation with the First Consul on the
situation of affairs.  Bonaparte told him that he was satisfied with the
existing police, and hinted that it was only to make himself of
consequence that he had given a false colouring to the picture.  Fouche
asked him what he would say if he told him that Georges and Pichegru had
been for some time in Paris carrying on the conspiracy of which he had
received information.  The First Consul, apparently delighted at what he
conceived to be Fouche's mistake, said, with an air of contempt, "You are
well informed, truly!  Regnier has just received a letter from London
stating that Pichegru dined three days ago at Kingston with one of the
King of England's ministers."

As Fouche, however, persisted in his assertion, the First Consul sent to
Paris for the Grand Judge, Regnier, who showed Fouche the letter he had
received.  The First Consul triumphed at first to see Fouche at fault;
but the latter so clearly proved that Georges and Pichegru were actually
in Paris that Regnier began to fear he had been misled by his agents,
whom his rival paid better than he did.  The First Consul, convinced that
his old minister knew more than his new one, dismissed Regnier, and
remained a long time in consultation with Fouche, who on that occasion
said nothing about his reinstatement for fear of exciting suspicion.
He only requested that the management of the business might be entrusted
to Real, with orders to obey whatever instructions he might receive from
him.  I will return hereafter to the arrest of Moreau and the other
persons accused, and will now subjoin the account of a long interview
which I had with Bonaparte in the midst of these important events.

On the 8th of March 1804, some time after the arrest but before the trial
of General Moreau, I had an audience of the First Consul, which was
unsought on my part.  Bonaparte, after putting several unimportant
questions to me as to what I was doing, what I expected he should do for
me, and assuring me that he would bear me in mind, gave a sudden turn to
the conversation, and said, "By the by, the report of my connection with
Hortense is still kept up: the most abominable rumours have been spread
as to her first child.  I thought at the time that these reports had only
been admitted by the public in consequence of the great desire that I
should not be childless.  Since you and I separated have you heard them
repeated?"--"Yes, General, oftentimes; and I confess I could not have
believed that this calumny would have existed so long."--"It is truly
frightful to think of!  You know the truth--you have seen all--heard all
--nothing could have passed without your knowledge; you were in her full
confidence during the time of her attachment to Duroc.  I therefore
expect, if you should ever write anything about me, that you will clear
me from this infamous imputation.  I would not have it accompany my name
to posterity.  I trust in you.  You have never given credit to the horrid
accusation?"--"No, General, never."  Napoleon then entered into a number
of details on the previous life of Hortense; on the way in which she
conducted herself, and on the turn which her marriage had taken.  "It has
not turned out," he said, "as I wished: the union has not been a happy
one.  I am sorry for it, not only because both are dear to me, but
because the circumstance countenances the infamous reports that are
current among the idle as to my intimacy with her."  He concluded the
conversation with these words:--"Bourrienne, I sometimes think of
recalling you; but as there is no good pretext for so doing, the world
would say that I have need of you, and I wish it to be known that I stand
in need of nobody."  He again said a few words about Hortense.
I answered that it would fully coincide with my conviction of the truth
to do what he desired, and that I would do it; but that suppressing the
false reports did not depend on me.

Hortense, in fact, while she was Mademoiselle BEAUHARNAIS, regarded
Napoleon with respectful awe.  She trembled when she spoke to him, and
never dared to ask him a favour.  When she had anything to solicit she
applied to me; and if I experienced any difficulty in obtaining for her
what she sought, I mentioned her as the person for whom I pleaded.
"The little simpleton!"  Napoleon would say, "why does she not ask me
herself: is the girl afraid of me?"  Napoleon never cherished for her any
feeling but paternal tenderness.  He loved her after his marriage with
her mother as he would have loved his own child.  During three years I
was a witness to all their most private actions, and I declare that I
never saw or heard anything that could furnish the least ground for
suspicion, or that afforded the slightest trace of the existence of a
culpable intimacy.  This calumny must be classed among those with which
malice delights to blacken the characters of men more brilliant than
their fellows, and which are so readily adopted by the light-minded and
unreflecting.  I freely declare that did I entertain the smallest doubt
with regard to this odious charge, of the existence of which I was well
aware before Napoleon spoke to me on the subject, I would candidly avow
it.  He is no more: and let his memory be accompanied only by that, be it
good or bad, which really belongs to it.  Let not this reproach be one of
those charged against him by the impartial historian.  I must say, in
concluding this delicate subject, that the principles of Napoleon on
points of this kind were rigid in the utmost degree, and that a
connection of the nature of that charged against him was neither in
accordance with his morals nor his tastes.

I cannot tell whether what followed was a portion of his premeditated
conversation with me, or whether it was the result of the satisfaction he
had derived from ascertaining my perfect conviction of the purity of his
conduct with regard to Hortense, and being assured that I would express
that conviction.  Be this as it may, as I was going out at the door he
called me back, saying, "Oh!  I have forgotten something."  I returned.
"Bourrienne," said he, "do you still keep up your acquaintance with the
Fauchers?"--"Yes, General; I see them frequently."--"You are wrong."--
"Why should I not?  They are clever, well-educated men, and exceedingly
pleasant company, especially Caesar.  I derive great pleasure from their
society; and then they are almost the only persons whose friendship has
continued faithful to me since I left you.  You know people do not care
for those who can render them no service."--"Maret will not see the
Fauchers."--"That may be, General; but it is nothing to me; and you must
recollect that as it was through him I was introduced to them at the
Tuileries, I think he ought to inform me of his reasons for dropping
their acquaintance."--"I tell you again he has closed his door against
them.  Do you the same; I advise you."  As I did not seem disposed to
follow this advice without some plausible reason, the First Consul added,
"You must know, then, that I learn from Caesar all that passes in your
house.  You do not speak very ill of me yourself, nor does any one
venture to do so in your presence.  You play your rubber and go to bed.
But no sooner are you gone than your wife, who never liked me, and most
of those who visit at your house, indulge in the most violent attacks
upon me.  I receive a bulletin from Caesar Faucher every day when he
visits at your house; this is the way in which he requites you for your
kindness, and for the asylum you afforded his brother.--[Constantine
Rancher had been condemned in contumacy for the forgery of a public
document.--Bourrienne.]--But enough; you see I know all--farewell;" and
he left me.

The grave having closed over these two brothers,--[The Fauchers were twin
brothers, distinguished in the war of the Revolution, and made brigadier-
generals at the same time on the field of battle.  After the Cent Jours
they refused to recognise the Bourbons, and were shot by sentence of
court-martial at Bordeaux. (Bouillet)]--I shall merely state that they
wrote me a letter the evening preceding their execution, i