Produced by Jim Weiler and Roger Frank




[Illustration: THE FLYING MERMAID SANK LOWER AND LOWER TOWARD THE
MYSTERIOUS HOLE.]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                    Five Thousand Miles Underground

                                   Or

                 The Mystery of the Centre of the Earth

                                   BY

                              ROY ROCKWOOD

         Author of "Through the Air to the North Pole," "Under
                the Ocean to the South Pole," "The Rival
                          Ocean Divers," Etc.

                              ILLUSTRATED

                                NEW YORK
                         CUPPLES & LEON COMPANY

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                          GOOD BOOKS FOR BOYS

                            By Roy Rockwood

                        THE GREAT MARVEL SERIES

            THROUGH THE AIR TO THE NORTH POLE
            Or The Wonderful Cruise of the Electric Monarch

            UNDER THE OCEAN TO THE SOUTH POLE
            Or The Strange Cruise of the Submarine Wonder

            FIVE THOUSAND MILES UNDERGROUND
            Or The Mystery of the Centre of the Earth

                           Cloth. Illustrated
                       Price per volume, 60 cents

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                          Copyright, 1908, by
                         Cupples & Leon Company

                    Five Thousand Miles Underground

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                                CONTENTS

                         I WASHINGTON BACKS OUT
                        II THE FLYING MERMAID
                       III WASHINGTON DECIDES
                        IV WHAT DID MARK SEE?
                         V ATTACKED BY A WHALE
                        VI THE CYCLONE
                       VII A QUEER SAIL
                      VIII THE FLYING MERMAID DISABLED
                        IX THE MUTINY
                         X FOOLING THEIR ENEMIES
                        XI MYSTERIOUS HAPPENINGS
                       XII THE BIG HOLE
                      XIII DOWN INTO THE EARTH
                       XIV MANY MILES BELOW
                        XV IN THE STRANGE DRAUGHT
                       XVI THE NEW LAND
                      XVII A STRANGE COUNTRY
                     XVIII CAUGHT BY A STRANGE PLANT
                       XIX THE BIG PEACH
                        XX OVERHAULING THE SHIP
                       XXI THE FISH THAT WALKED
                      XXII THE SNAKE-TREE
                     XXIII THE DESERTED VILLAGE
                      XXIV THE GIANTS
                       XXV HELD BY THE ENEMY
                     XXVII A FRIEND INDEED
                     XXVII A GREAT JOURNEY
                    XXVIII THE TEMPLE OF TREASURE
                      XXIX BACK HOME--CONCLUSION

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                    FIVE THOUSAND MILES UNDERGROUND


                               CHAPTER I

                          WASHINGTON BACKS OUT

"Washington! I say Washington!"

Throughout a big shed, filled for the most part with huge pieces of
machinery, echoed the voice of Professor Amos Henderson. He did not look
up from a small engine over which he was bending.

"Washington! Where are you? Why don't you answer me?"

From somewhere underneath an immense pile of iron, steel and aluminum
came the voice of a colored man.

"Yas sir, Perfesser, I'se goin' t' saggasiate my bodily presence in yo'
contiguous proximity an' attend t' yo' immediate conglomerated
prescriptions at th' predistined period. Yas, sir!"

"Well, Washington, if you had started when you began that long speech
you would have been at least half way here by this time. Hurry up! Never
mind tightning those bolts now. Find the boys. I need them to help me
with this engine. They must be around somewhere."

"I seen 'em goin' fishin' down by th' brook a little while ago,"
answered the negro, crawling out from under what seemed to be a combined
airship and watercraft. "Jack says as how yo' gived him permission t'
occupy his indisputatious period of levity in endeavorin' t' extract
from th' liquid element some specimens of swimmin' creatures."

"If you mean I said he and Mark could go fishing in the brook, you're
right, Washington," replied the professor with a smile. "But you waste a
lot of time and breath trying to say it. Why don't you give up using big
words?"

"I reckon I was brought up t' it," replied the colored man grinning from
ear to ear. He did not always use big words but when he did they were
generally the wrong ones. Sometimes, he spoke quite correctly.

"Well, I suppose you can't help it," resumed Mr. Henderson. "However,
never mind that. Find the boys and send them to me."

"With th' least appreciatableness amount of postponement," answered the
messenger, and he went out.

Washington White, who in color was just the opposite to his name, a
general helper and companion to Professor Henderson, found Mark Sampson
and Jack Darrow about a quarter of a mile from the big shed, which was
in the center of a wooded island off the coast of Maine. The lads were
seated on the bank of a small brook, fishing.

"Perfesser wants yo' immediate," said Washington.

"But we haven't caught a single fish," objected Mark.

"Them's the orders from headquarters," replied the colored man. "Yo'
both got t' project yo'selves in th' vicinity of th' machine shop. I
reckon th' new fangled contraption that th' perfesser is goin' t'
navigate th' air an' sail th' angry seas in, am about done. He want's t'
try th' engine."

"Come on then," said Jack. "We probably would not catch any fish,
anyhow, Mark."

Accompanied by Washington, the youths, each of whom was about eighteen
years old, started toward the big shed.

While they are on their way opportunity may be taken to tell a little
about them, as well as about Washington and the professor, and the
curious craft on which the scientist was working.

A few years before this story opens Mr. Henderson had invented a
wonderful electric airship. He had it about completed when, one day, he
and the two boys became unexpectedly acquainted, and, as it developed,
friends.

Mark and Jack were orphans. After having rather a hard time knocking
about the world trying to make a living, they chanced to meet, and
resolved to cast their lots together. They boarded a freight train, and,
as told in the first volume of this series, entitled, "Through the Air
to the North Pole; or the Wonderful Cruise of the Electric Monarch," the
cars were wrecked near where Professor Henderson was building his
strange craft.

The boys were cared for by the scientist, and, after their recovery from
hurts received in the collision, they accepted his invitation to make
the trip through the upper regions in the airship, to search for the
north pole. With them went Andy Sudds, an old hunter, and Tom Smith and
Bill Jones, two farmers, but who were hired as helpers on the voyage.
The party had many adventures on the trip, having battles with savage
animals and more savage Esquimaux, and were tossed about in terrible
storms. After making some scientific observations, which the professor
was much interested in, they started back home.

Having found he could successfully sail in the air, Mr. Henderson
resolved to try what it might be like under water.

He moved his machine shop to a lonely spot on the Maine coast, and
there, with the help of the boys, Washington, Andy and two machinists
constructed a submarine boat, called the _Porpoise_.

In this the professor resolved to seek the south pole, he having a
theory that it was surrounded by an open sea. After much hard work the
_Porpoise_ was made ready for the voyage.

What occurred on this great trip is described in the second book of this
series, called "Under the Ocean to the South Pole, or the Strange Cruise
of the Submarine Wonder." In that is told how once more Tom and Bill,
with Andy, the boys and Washington, accompanying Professor Henderson,
had many thrilling experiences.

They were caught in the grip of the grass of the terrible Sargasso Sea.
Monstrous suckers grasped the boat in their powerful arms, and had to be
fought off. They were caught in a sea of boiling water and imprisoned
between big fields of ice.

By means of strong diving suits they were able to leave the ship and
walk about on the bottom of the sea. They visited a graveyard of sunken
ships, saw many strange monsters as well as many beautiful fish in the
great depths to which they sunk. Many times they were in dire peril but
the resources of the professor, the bravery and daring of the boys, no
less than the help Washington and Andy Sudds, the hunter, rendered at
times, brought them through.

Those of you who read of their adventures will recall the strange island
which they came upon in the Atlantic Ocean, far from the coast of South
America.

When they first drew near this island they were almost sucked into the
depths of a great whirlpool, caused by water pouring down a big hole
that seemed to lead far into the earth. They reversed their ship just in
time.

But, on going to another side of the island they were able to approach
safely, as at this point the great hole was farther from the shore. Then
they landed and investigated.

They found the island was almost circular, and the hole was also round,
but not in the center of the land. It was an immense cavity, so wide
they could not see across, and as for the depth they could only guess at
it. Looking down they could only see rolling masses of vapor and clouds
caused by the water which poured down from the ocean with the force of a
Niagara.

Gazing down into the big hole Mark suggested it might lead to the centre
of the earth, which some scientists claim is hollow. The professor
admitted that the cavity looked as though it led to China.

They had no means of investigating further the mystery of the opening
and returned to their submarine, completing the voyage to the south
pole.

It was now about two years since they had come back from that eventful
trip. One of the first things the professor did, after docking the
_Porpoise_, was to shut himself up in his study and begin to draw plans.
To the questions of the boys he returned no answer for several days.
Then he announced he was working on a craft which could both sail on top
of the water and navigate the air.

In time the plans were done, and, in order to keep the work secret, the
shop was moved to an island which the professor owned.

Parts of the _Monarch_ and the _Porpoise_ were used in constructing the
new craft, so there was no need to get other help than that which the
boys, Washington and Bill and Tom could give, since the two latter
accepted an offer of the professor to remain and work for him. The boys,
of course, would not leave their friend.

The professor realized that he had a more difficult task in his new
venture than he had set himself on other occasions. For a ship to be
light enough to rise in the air, and, at another time, and with no
change, to be strong enough to navigate the ocean, was indeed something
to tax Mr. Henderson's ingenuity.

However, in the course of a little over a year the larger part of the
work was done. Inside the big shed was the huge affair which, it was
hoped, would enable its owner to be master of both air and water.

"Did the professor say anything special?" asked Mark of Washington.

"Nope. I reckon he were too busy problamatin' the exact altitude
projected in an inverse direction by th' square root of th' new engine
when operated at a million times inside of a few seconds, but he didn't
say nothin' t' me. I were busy underneath th' ship, fixin' bolts when he
tole me t' find yo'. I wouldn't be s'prised if he had th' thing goin'
soon."

"Do you think he'll be generating the new gas to-day?" asked Jack
eagerly. "That's the most troublesome part; to get that gas right."

"He didn't say nothin' t' me 'bout it," Washington stated, as he walked
along beside the two boys. "He jest seemed anxious like."

"We'd better hurry," advised Mark. "He may be at an important part in
his experiments and probably needs us. I hope it will work. He has spent
many days on it, and we all have worked hard. It ought to be a success."

"Perfesser allers makes things work," declared Washington stoutly.

"That's a good way to feel about it, anyway," observed Mark. "Well,
we'll soon know."

The three hurried to the shed which they could see as they rounded a
turn of the path through the wood. They noticed an elderly man
approaching with a gun on his shoulder. On one arm he carried a game
bag.

"Guess Andy got something for dinner," remarked Jack.

"I hopes so, honey," put in Washington. "I'se got a sort of gone feelin'
in my stomach!"

"Any luck, Andy?" called Mark, when he came within hailing distance.

"Fine," replied Andy Sudds. "Rabbits and quail. We'll have a good dinner
to-morrow."

While Andy entered the living part of the big shed to put away his gun
and game, the boys and Washington kept on to the engine room. They found
the professor, with Bill and Tom, busy fitting pipes to the small engine
which was set up at one side of the structure.

"Come, boys, I need your aid," remarked Mr. Henderson as they entered.
"Take off your coats and pitch in. Tighten up these bolts, Jack. Mark,
you mix up those chemicals the way I taught you, and see that the dynamo
is in working order for Washington to attend to."

In a little while the shop was a veritable hive of industry, and it
resounded to the sound of hammers, wrenches and machinery. In the
background was the big ship, which seemed like two immense cigars, one
above the other, the lower one the larger.

"Where was you calalatin' t' take this here ship when it gits done,
Perfesser?" asked Washington, during a lull in the operations.

"Do you remember that big hole in the island we visited on our trip to
the south pole?"

"I suah does," answered the colored man.

"We are going to explore that," went on the scientist. "We are going to
make a voyage to the interior of the earth in our _Flying Mermaid_."

"Go down into th' earth!" exclaimed Washington, his eyes big with
fright.

"Certainly; why not?"

"Not for mine!" cried the colored man, dropping the wrench he was
holding. "No sir! I'm not goin' t' project myself int' a grave while
I'se alive. Time enough when I kicks th' bucket. No sir! If yo' an' the
boys wants t' risk yo' se'ves goin' down int' th' interior of th' earth,
where th' Bible says there's fiery furnaces, yo' kin go, but Washington
White stays on terra cotta! That's where he stays; He ain't ready t' be
buried, not jest yet!" and the frightened colored man started to leave
the shed.




                               CHAPTER II

                           THE FLYING MERMAID


"Here! Stop him!" cried Professor Henderson. "Don't let him get away. We
still need his help to get the ship in shape. He needn't be frightened.
We're not going to start at once."

Mark and Jack ran after Washington, whose progress was somewhat impeded
because he kept looking back as if he feared the new ship was chasing
him.

"Come on back!" said Mark. "There's no danger, and if there was we're
not going to start to-day."

"Ain't yo' foolin' me?" asked Washington, pausing and looking doubtfully
at the boys.

"Of course not," answered Mark. "You know Professor Henderson would not
make you do anything you didn't want to do, Wash. He wishes you to stay
and help him get ready, that's all."

"Well, Washington," observed the aged scientist. "I didn't think you'd
go back on me."

"I'd do mos' anything fer yo', Perfesser," said the colored man, "but I
got t' beg off this time," and he looked at the _Flying Mermaid_ as if
he thought the metal sides would open and devour him.

"Then help me get things in shape to generate the gas," the scientist
said. "I want to give the new vapor the first real test in lifting power
to-day. On the success of it depends the future of the ship."

Seeing there was no immediate danger of being carried to the centre of
the earth, Washington resumed his labors. The professor, the boys, Bill
and Tom were also hurrying matters to enable a test to be made before
night.

As will readily be seen, even by those not familiar with the
construction of airships and submarines, the chief problem was to find
some agent strong enough to lift from the earth a weight heavier than
had ever before been put into an apparatus that was destined to traverse
the clouds. For the _Flying Mermaid_ was not only an airship but an
ocean voyager as well. It had to be made light enough to be lifted far
above the earth, yet the very nature of it, necessitating it being made
heavy enough to stand the buffeting of the waves and the pressure of
water, was against its flying abilities.

Professor Henderson realized this and knew that the chief concern would
be to discover a gas or vapor with five times the lifting power of
hydrogen, one of the lightest gases known, and one sometimes used to
inflate balloons.

After long study he had been partially successful, but he knew from
experiments made that the gas he had so far been able to manufacture
would not answer. What he wanted was some element that could be mixed
with the gas, to neutralize the attraction of gravitation, or downward
pull of the earth.

While he was seeking this, and experimenting on many lines, the
construction of the air-water ship went on. In general the outward
construction was two cigar shaped hulls, one above the other. Aluminum,
being the lightest and strongest metal that could be used for the
purpose, formed the main part of both bodies.

The upper hull was one hundred feet long and twenty feet in diameter at
the widest part. It tapered to points at either end. It was attached to
the lower hull by strong braces, at either end, while from the center
there extended a pipe which connected with the lower section. This pipe
was intended to convey the lifting gas to the part which corresponded to
the bag of the balloon, save that it was of metal instead of silk, or
rubber as is usual.

There were two reasons for this. One was that it would not be liable to
puncture, particularly in the proposed underground trip, and the other
was that it did not have to be so large as a cloth bag would have had to
be. It was also a permanent part of the ship, and on a voyage where part
of the time the travelers would be in the air and part on the water, and
when the change from one to the other would have to be made quickly,
this was necessary. It would have taken too long to raise the ship in
the air had a cloth bag been used to contain the gas.

The lower hull or main part of the craft was one hundred and fifty feet
long, and forty feet through at the largest part, in the centre.

It was divided into four sections. The forward one contained the
sleeping quarters of Professor Henderson and his crew. There was a small
stateroom for each one. Above was a conning or observation tower,
reached by a small flight of steps. From this tower the ship could be
steered, stopped and started, as could also be done from the engine
room, which was in the after part of the hull.

As in the _Porpoise_ and _Monarch_, electricity formed the motive power
and was also used for many other purposes on board. Engines operated by
gas produced the current which heated, lighted and moved the ship, as
well as played a part in producing the wonderful gas.

The ship moved forward or backward by means of a novel arrangement. This
was by the power of compressed air. From either end of the lower hull
there projected a short pipe working in a ball and socket joint, so it
could be turned in any direction. By means of strong pumps a current of
compressed air could be sent out from either pipe. Thus when floating
above the earth the ship was forced forward by the blast of air rushing
from the pipe at the stern. It was the same principle as that on which a
sky rocket is shot heavenward, save that gases produced by the burning
of powder in the pasteboard rocket form its moving impulse.

In the case of the _Flying Mermaid_, it could be made to move backward
by sending the air out of the forward tube. Thus, when in the water, the
compressed air rushing from the pipe struck the fluid and forced the
ship forward or backward as was desired. It floated on the surface, the
deck being about three feet out of water, while the aluminum gas bag was
overhead.

The engine room was a marvel of machine construction. It contained pumps
for air and water, motors, dynamos, gas engines, and a maze of wheels
and levers. Yet everything was very compact and no room was wasted.

The use of the air method of propulsion did away with the necessity of a
large propellor such as most airships have to use, a propellor which
must of necessity be very light and which is easily broken.

Next to the engine room was the kitchen. It contained an electric range
and all necessary appliances and utensils for preparing meals. There
were lockers and a large reserve storeroom which when the time came
would be well stocked with food. Forward of the kitchen was the living
and dining room. It contained comfortable seats, folding tables and a
small library. Here, also were many instruments designed to show how the
various machines were working. There were gages, pointers and dials,
which told the direction the ship was traveling, the speed and the
distance above the earth or below the surface. Similar indicators were
in the conning tower, which had a powerful search light.

The ship was lighted throughout by incandescent lamps, and there was
even a small automatic piano worked by the electric current, on which
popular airs could be played.

If the gas and the gravity neutralizer worked as Professor Henderson
hoped they would, as soon as the ship was completed, all that would be
necessary to start on the voyage would be to fill the aluminum bag and
set the air compressor in motion.

The gas was made from common air, chemically treated and with a secret
material added which by means of a complicated machine in a measure did
away with the downward pull of the earth. Thus all that was necessary to
carry on a long voyage was a quantity of gasolene to operate the engine
which worked the electric machines, and some of this secret compound.

The professor and his helpers had been working to good advantage. At
last all was in readiness for the gas test.

It was proposed to try it on an experimental scale. Some of the fluid
was to be generated and forced into an aluminum cylinder under the same
pressure it would be used in the air ship. To this cylinder were
attached weights in proportion to the weight of the _Flying Mermaid_
with its load of human freight, engines and equipment.

"This cylinder is just one one-hundredth the size of the cylinder of the
ship," said the professor. "I am going to fasten to it a hundred pound
weight. If it lifts that our latest contrivance will be a success."

"You mean if the little cylinder pulls a hundred pounds up the big ship
will take us and the machinery up?" asked Mark.

"Certainly," answered the professor. "If this cylinder lifts a hundred
pounds, one a hundred times as big (as that of the _Mermaid_ is), will
lift a hundred times as much, or ten thousand pounds. That is five tons,
or more than a ton over what I figure to be the weight of our ship and
contents. The latest war balloon can lift one ton with ease, and if my
machine can not do five times as well I shall be disappointed."

The last adjustments were made, pipes were run from the gas generator to
the cylinder, and the hundred pound weight was attached.

"Everybody look out now," said Mr. Henderson. "I am going to start the
machine and let the gas enter the cylinder. It is a very powerful gas
and may break the cylinder. If it does you must all duck."

The scientist gave a last look at everything. The boys got behind some
boards whence they could see without being in danger. Washington, who
had little fear so long as there was no danger of going under ground,
took his place at the dynamo. Andy Sudds, with Bill and Tom, stationed
themselves in safe places.

"All ready!" called the professor.

He pulled a lever toward him, turned a wheel and signalled to Washington
to start the dynamo. There was a sound of buzzing machinery, which was
followed by a hiss as the gas began to enter the cylinder under
pressure. Would it stand the strain? That question was uppermost in
every one's mind save the professor's. He only cared to see the cylinder
leave the ground, carrying the weight with it. That would prove his long
labors were crowned with success.

Faster and faster whirred the dynamo. The gas was being generated from
the air. The secret chemical made a hissing which could be heard for
some distance. The gage registered a heavy pressure. Anxiously the
professor watched the cylinder.

"There!" he exclaimed at length. "It has all the gas it can hold. Now to
see if it works!"

He disconnected the pipe leading from the generator. This left the
cylinder free. It seemed to tremble slightly. There appeared to be a
movement to the hundred pound weight which rested on the ground. It was
as if it was tugging to get loose.

"There it goes! There it goes!" cried Mark, joyfully.

"Hurrah!" shouted Jack. "There she rises!"

"It suttinly am projectin' itself skyward!" yelled Washington, coming
from the dynamo.

Sure enough the cylinder was slowly rising in the air, bearing the
weight with it. It had lifted it clear from the ground and was
approaching the roof of the big shed.

"It will work! It will work!" exclaimed the professor, strangely
excited.

The next instant the cylinder, carrying the weight, sailed right out of
an open skylight, and began drifting outside the shop, and across the
fields.

"Quick! We must get it back!" cried Mr. Henderson. "If it gets away my
secret may be discovered and I will lose all! We must secure it!"

But the cylinder was now two hundred feet in the air and being blown to
the east, the weight dangling below it, making it look like a miniature
airship.

"We can never catch that!" cried Mark.




                              CHAPTER III

                           WASHINGTON DECIDES


"We must catch that cylinder!" the professor exclaimed. "Some one may
find it when it comes down and analyze the gas. Then he would discover
how to make it. The cylinder must come down!"

"Don't see how we can proximate ourselves inter th' vicinity of it
lessen we delegate th' imperial functions of ornithological specimens t'
some member of this here party," observed Washington.

"If you mean we can't catch that there contraption unless we turn into
birds I'll show you that you're mistaken!" cried Andy Sudds. "I guess I
have a trick or two up my sleeve," and the old hunter quickly threw open
the breech of his gun and inserted a couple of cartridges.

He raised the piece to his shoulder and took quick aim. There was a
sliver of flame, a puff of smoke and a sharp report. The professor and
the boys who were watching the cylinder saw it vibrate up in the air.
Then there came a whistling sound. An instant later the metal body began
to descend, and it and the weight fell to the earth.

"I'm sorry I had to put a bullet through it, Professor," said old Andy
with a queer smile, "but it was the only way I saw of bringing it down.
Hope it isn't damaged much."

"It doesn't matter if it is," the scientist answered. "I can make more
cylinders, but I don't want that secret of the gas to become known. Your
bullet served a good turn, Andy, for it let the compressed vapor out
just in time."

"Then we may consider the experiment a success," said Mark, as
Washington went to where the cylinder had fallen, to detach it from the
weight and bring both to the shed.

"It seems so," Mr. Henderson answered. "True, it was only an experiment.
We have yet to test the ship itself."

"When can we do that?" asked Jack.

"I hope by Monday," the scientist answered.

"Will you try it in the water or air first?" asked Mark.

"I'm almost certain it will float in the water," the aged inventor said.
"It does not require much work to make a ship which will do that. But
the air proposition is another matter. However, since the cylinder rose,
I am pretty sure the _Flying Mermaid_ will.

"But we have done enough work to-day. Let's rest and have something to
eat. Then, with Sunday to sit around and talk matters over, we will be
ready for Monday's test."

Some of the game Andy had killed was soon on the table, for Washington,
in addition to his other accomplishments, was an expert cook. During the
evening the boys and their friends sat in the living room of the big
shed and talked over the events of the day.

Sunday was spent in discussing what adventures might lie before them
should they be able to descend into the big hole. Washington did not say
much, but it was easy to see he had no notion of going. He even began to
pack his few belongings in readiness to leave the service of Mr.
Henderson, for whom he had worked a good many years.

No one remained long abed Monday morning. Even Washington was up early
in spite of the interest he had lost in the professor's voyage.

"I jest wants t' see yo' start fer that place where they buries live
folks," he said.

In order to properly test the _Flying Mermaid_ it was necessary to move
the craft from the shed from which place it had never been taken since
it's construction was started. It had been built on big rollers in
anticipation of this need, so that all which was now necessary was to
open the doors at the end, and roll the craft out.

This was accomplished with no small amount of labor, and it was nearly
noon before the big ship was moved into the open. It was shoved along to
a little clearing in front of the shed, where no trees would interfere
with its possible upward movement.

Everyone was bustling about. The professor was busiest of all. He went
from one machine to another; from this apparatus to that, testing here,
turning wheels there, adjusting valves and seeing that all was in
readiness for the generating of the powerful gas.

As the airship was half round on the bottom and as it rested in a sort
of semi-circular cradle; it brought the entrance some distance above the
ground. To make it easier to get in and out while preparations for the
trial were going on, Bill and Tom had made an improvised pair of steps,
which were tied to the side of the ship with ropes.

Up and down these the professor, the boys and Andy went, taking in tools
and materials, and removing considerable refuse which had accumulated
during the building of the craft.

Finally all was in readiness for starting the making of the gas. The
ship was not wholly complete and no supplies or provisions for the long
voyage had been taken aboard. The _Flying Mermaid_ was about a ton
lighter than it would be when fully fitted out, but to make up for this
the professor had left in the ship a lot of tools and surplus machinery
so that the craft held as much weight as it would under normal
conditions. If the gas lifted it now it would at any other time.

"Start the generator," said Mr. Henderson, to Mark. "We'll soon see
whether we are going to succeed or fail."

The boy turned a number of levers and wheels. The machine which made the
powerful vapor was soon in operation. The professor had already added
enough of the secret compound to the tank containing the other
ingredients, and the big pump was sucking in air to be transformed into
the lifting gas.

The boys and the professor were in the engine room. Andy Sudds, with
Bill and Tom, had taken their places in the living room, to more evenly
balance the ship, since the things in it were not yet all in their
proper places. As for Washington he was busy running from the shed to
the ship with various tools and bits of machinery the professor desired.

The gas was being generated rapidly. Throughout the ship there resounded
a hissing noise that told it was being forced through the pipe into the
aluminum shell above the ship proper.

"I wonder how soon it will begin to lift us," said Mark.

"It will take about half an hour," replied Mr. Henderson. "You see we
have first to fill the holder completely, since there is no gas in it.
After this we will keep some on hand, so that it will only need the
addition of a small quantity to enable the ship to rise."

He was busy watching the pointer on a dial which indicated the pressure
of the gas, and the lifting force. The boys were kept busy making
adjustments to the machinery and oiling bearings.

Suddenly, throughout the length of the craft there was felt a curious
trembling. It was as though the screw of a powerful steamer was
revolving in the water.

"What is it?" asked Jack.

"I hope it is the lifting power of the gas making itself felt," the
professor answered. "Perhaps the _Flying Mermaid_ is getting ready to
try her wings."

The trembling became more pronounced. The gas was being generated faster
than ever. The whole ship was trembling. Tom and Bill came from the
room, where they were stationed, to inquire the meaning, but were
reassured by the professor.

"Don't be alarmed if you find yourselves up in the air pretty soon," he
remarked with a smile. "Remember the _Electric Monarch_, and the flights
she took. We may not go as high as we did in her, but it will answer the
same purpose."

The gas was hissing through the big tube as it rushed into the overhead
holder. The gage indicated a heavy pressure. The ship began to tremble
more violently and to sway slightly from side to side.

"I think we shall rise presently," said Mr. Henderson. His voice showed
the pride he felt at the seeming success with which his invention was
about to meet.

Suddenly, with a little jerk, as though some one with a giant hand had
plucked the _Flying Mermaid_ from the earth, the ship gave a little
bound into the air, and was floating free.

"Here we go!" cried Mr. Henderson. "The ship is a success. Now we're off
for the hole in the earth!"

The _Flying Mermaid_ was indeed rising in the air. True it did not go up
so swiftly as had the _Monarch_, but then it was a much heavier and
stronger vessel, and flying was only one of its accomplishments.

"It's a success! It's a success!" shouted Mark, capering about in his
excitement.

"Now we'll see what the centre of the earth looks like," went on Jack.
"I can hardly wait for the time to come when we are to start on the
voyage."

At that instant, when the ship was but a few feet from the ground, but
slowly rising, the boys and the professor heard a shouting below them.

"What's that?" asked the scientist. "Is any one hurt?"

Mark ran to a small window, something like a port hole in an ocean
steamer, and looked out.

"Quick!" he shouted. "Stop the ship! Washington will be killed!"

In fact from the agonized yells which proceeded from somewhere under the
craft it seemed that the accident was in process of happening.

"Save me! Save me!" cried the colored man. "I'm goin' to fall! Catch me,
some one!"

"What is it?" asked the professor, making ready to shut off the power
and let the ship settle back to earth, from which it had moved about
fifty feet.

"It's Washington," explained Mark. "He evidently tried to walk up the
steps just as the boat mounted skyward. He rolled down and managed to
grab the end of the rope which was left over after the steps were tied.
Now he's swinging down there."

"Are you going to lower the ship?" asked Jack.

"Of course!" exclaimed the professor. "I only hope he hangs on until his
feet touch the earth."

"Keep a tight hold!" shouted Mark, from out of the small window.

"That's th' truest thing yo' ever said!" exclaimed Washington. "You bet
I'm goin' to hold on, and I'm comin' up too," which he proceeded to do,
hand over hand, like a sailor.

The boys and the professor watched the colored man's upward progress.
The ship had hardly begun to settle as, in the excitement, not enough
gas had been let out. Closer and closer came Washington, until he was
able to grasp the edge of the opening, to which the steps were fastened.

"I thought you weren't coming with us," observed the professor, when he
saw that his helper was safe.

"I changed my mind," said the colored man. "It's jest luck. Seems like
th' ship done wanted me t' go 'long, an' I'm goin'. I'll take my chances
on bein' buried alive. I ain't never seen th' centre of th' earth, an' I
want's to 'fore I die. I'm goin' 'long, Perfessor!"




                               CHAPTER IV

                           WHAT DID MARK SEE?


"Well, I'm glad you've decided at last," the professor remarked. "Now
come inside and we'll see how the ship works."

Once over his fright, Washington made himself at home on the craft he
had helped build. He went from one room to another and observed the
engine.

"She certainly am workin'" he observed with pride. "Are we still goin'
up, Perfessor?"

"Still mounting," replied Mr. Henderson. "We are now three hundred feet
above the earth," he added as he glanced at a registering gage.

The great air pump was set going and soon from the after tube, a big
stream of the compressed vapor rushed. It acted on the ship instantly
and sent the craft ahead at a rapid rate. By elevating or depressing the
tube the craft could be sent obliquely up or down. Then, by forcing the
air from the forward tube, the _Mermaid_ was reversed and scudded
backward.

But it was more with the ship's ability to rise and descend that
Professor Henderson was concerned, since on that depended their safety.
So various tests were made, in generating the gas and using the negative
gravity apparatus.

All worked to perfection. Obeying the slightest turn of the wheels and
levers the _Mermaid_ rose or fell. She stood still, suspended herself in
the air, or rushed backward and forward.

Of course the machinery was new and did not operate as smoothly as it
would later, but the professor and his friends were very well satisfied.

"Now we'll try something new," said the scientist to the two boys as
they stood beside him in the tower. "I only hope this part succeeds, and
we shall soon be off on our voyage."

He turned several levers. There was a hissing sound as the gas rushed
from the container, and the ship began to settle down.

"What's th' matter? Are we goin' t' hit th' earth?" yelled Washington,
rushing from the engine room.

"Keep quiet," ordered the professor. "We are only going down, that's
all."

"But good land! Perfesser!" exclaimed the colored man. "The ocean's
right under us! You forgot you sailed away from the island! We'll be
drowned suah!"

"Leave it to me," said Mr. Henderson. "The _Flying Mermaid_ is going to
take a bath!"

"As long as it swims it will be all right," observed Mark in a low tone
to Jack. "I'm glad I can take care of myself in the water."

Before Jack could reply the _Mermaid_ seemed to take a sudden dive
through the air. The next instant she struck the water with a splash
that sent the waves rolling all about. The craft rocked violently to and
fro on the surface of the sea. For a while there were anxious hearts
aboard, for there was no certainty but that the ship might not sink to
the bottom.

But the old professor had not calculated and builded in vain. After
rocking about like a vessel newly launched, the strange craft rode
safely and upright on the water. It set down far enough to bring the
propelling tubes well under, but not so far but that the conning tower
was well out and there was a small deck available.

"Now to see if we can conquer the water as we did the air!" cried the
professor. "Mark, start the air pump. Jack, you steer, for I want to
watch the machinery under the additional strain."

From the rear tube rushed such a volume of air that the ocean near it
bubbled and foamed. The ship trembled from stem to stern, and then,
after hanging for an instant as if undecided what to do, it began to
move forward as easily as though it had never sailed any other element
than the sea.

"She fits her name!" the professor cried. "She is indeed the _Flying
Mermaid_, for she sails the ocean as easily as she navigates in the
clouds!"

For a mile or two the craft was sent ahead over the waves. Then it was
reversed and run backwards. Satisfied that his long months of work had
not gone for naught, the professor after trying several experiments,
decided to try and raise the ship while in motion.

With Jack and Mark to look after the air pumps, while Washington, Tom
and Bill busied themselves in the engine room, Mr. Henderson began to
generate the gas and start the negative gravity apparatus. All the while
the craft was forging ahead.

There was again the hissing sound that told of the aluminum holder being
filled. For a few minutes there seemed to be no change, the _Mermaid_
plowing forward.

Then like a bird rising from the waves, or like a flying fish leaping
from the sea to escape some pursuing monster of the deep, the new ship
shot up diagonally from the surface and winged its way into the upper
regions of the air.

"Success! Success!" cried the professor. "This proves all I wanted to
know. Now we are ready for our great trip!"

Great were the rejoicings in the camp that night. It was like living
over again the days when they were aboard the diving _Porpoise_ or the
flying _Monarch_. To the recollections were added the anticipations of
what was before them in the trip to the interior of the earth.

Busy days followed, for there was still much to be done to the _Flying
Mermaid_. The machinery, which was only partly completed, had to be
finished. Besides this the professor was working on some apparatus, the
use of which he did not disclose to any one. It was stored aboard the
ship at the last minute.

Plenty of provisions had to be taken aboard, and many supplies needed to
work the _Mermaid_ and insure that it would go to the end of the voyage.
The materials for generating the gas and negative gravity, spare parts,
records for the automatic piano and other things were stored away.

Some guns and ammunition were taken along as were a few revolvers, since
old Andy had said it was best to prepare for any thing in the shape of
enemies or wild beasts that might be met with in the interior regions.

It was decided to make the start by sailing along the surface of the sea
for several days, as in the event of any weakness in the machinery being
discovered there would be less danger. If, at the end of four days, no
trouble developed, the professor said he would send the _Mermaid_ into
the air and make the rest of the voyage through the sky.

The night before the start was to be made the professor, with the boys,
Washington and the other helpers, went about through the various shops
and buildings, locking them up securely. For they could not tell how
long they would be away, and they had to leave behind much valuable
material.

As there were several things that needed attention they divided the work
up. Mark had finished his share and was walking back toward the living
cabin where they were all quartered, when, down at the shore, near where
the boat was moored, he fancied he saw, in the gathering darkness, a
moving figure.

"I wonder who that can be," he thought. "All the others are near the
machine shop, for I just left them there. Perhaps it's some one trying
to spy out how the _Mermaid_ is built."

Knowing the professor wanted his secret well guarded, Mark walked softly
toward the little dock that served as a place whence the _Mermaid_ could
be easily boarded. As he approached he saw the figure moving. Something
struck the boy as peculiar.

Though the object had some of the characteristics of a man it did not
walk like a human being, but shuffled along more like a huge ape or
monkey. It seemed bent over, as if it stooped toward the ground.

"Who are you?" called Mark suddenly.

For an instant the figure halted and then hurried on faster than before,
with a curious, shuffling walk. It was approaching the ship.

Somehow it struck Mark as if it was an uncanny being; an inhabitant of
some other world. Then he laughed at his half-fear, and started on a run
toward the dock.

"If it's some tramp trying to find a place to sleep he'd better not go
aboard the ship, he might do some damage," the boy thought.

He could hardly see the figure now as it had passed into the shadow cast
by the boat. He was about to summon the professor to make an
investigation, when Washington started going the search light which was
placed just over the door of the living cabin. It was kept there as a
sort of beacon light, as, near the island was a dangerous ledge of
rocks.

Then, in the blinding white glare from the big lantern as Washington
accidentally swung it toward the _Mermaid_, Mark beheld a strange sight.

The figure he had been watching stood out in bold relief. Though it was
shaped like a human being it was not like any person the boy had ever
seen. It seemed covered with a skin twice too large for it; a skin,
which, in spite of the clothes that concealed it, hung in folds about
the arms and legs, dropping pendent like from the neck like a big
garment, and flapping in the wind.

For an instant Mark was so startled he cried out, and the professor and
the others ran to see what was the matter.

"There--by the ship! A horrible creature!" exclaimed Mark.

Shouting to Washington to keep the light steady in the direction of the
dock, Mr. Henderson ran toward the moored _Mermaid_. Jack, Andy, Bill
and Tom, with Mark in the rear followed him.

"Nothing here," said the scientist, after a careful search about. "Are
you sure you saw something, Mark?"

"Positively," replied the lad with a shudder. He described the vision of
the darkness.

"I guess it was a big otter, or maybe an enormous turtle," the professor
said.




                               CHAPTER V

                          ATTACKED BY A WHALE


But Mark was certain it was nothing like that, though a careful search
failed to reveal anything or any person near the ship. It was too dark
to examine for footprints, and even Mark, after taking a look all about,
felt he might have been deceived by shadows. Still he was a little
nervous, and could hardly sleep for imagining what the thing he saw
could have been.

The next day every one was so busy that no one, not even Mark, recalled
the little excitement of the night before. Shortly after noon, final
preparations having been made, they all got aboard the _Mermaid_ and
started off.

It was a bright sunshiny day, and the craft, speeding away from the
island where it had been constructed, over the dancing blue waves, must
have presented a strange sight had there been any spectators. For surely
no such ship had ever before sailed those waters.

However, there was no other vessel in sight, and the island, as far as
the professor and his friends knew, had never been inhabited.

"We will not try for any great speed," Mr. Henderson remarked as he,
with Mark and Jack, stood in the conning tower managing the _Mermaid_.
"We don't want to strain any joints at the start or heat any engine
bearings. There will be time enough for speed later."

"Yes, and we may need it more when we get into the centre of the earth
than we do now," observed Mark.

"Why so?" asked Jack.

"No telling what we may run up against underneath the ground," went on
Mark. "We may have to fight strange animals and stranger beings.
Besides, the atmosphere and water there can't be the same as up here; do
you think so, Professor?"

For a few minutes the scientist was silent. He seemed to be thinking
deeply.

"I will tell you what I believe," he said at length. "I have never
spoken of it before, but now that we are fairly started and may
eventually have a chance to prove my theory, I will say that I think the
centre of this earth on which we live is hollow. Inside of it, forming a
core, so to speak, I believe there is another earth, similar to ours in
some respects which revolves inside this larger sphere."

They were well out to sea now, as they could observe when they emerged
on the little deck. Above their heads was the aluminum gas holder, which
served as a sort of protection from the sun that was quite warm. The
_Mermaid_ rode with an easy motion, being submerged just enough to make
her steady, yet not deep enough to encounter much resistance from the
water. In fact it could not have been arranged better for speed or
comfort.

"I think we will sail well to the eastward before making our course
south," Mr. Henderson said. "I do not care to meet too many ships, as
those aboard will be very curious and I do not want too much news of
this venture to get out. We will take an unfrequented route and avoid
delays by being hailed by every passing vessel whose captain will wonder
what queer craft he had met with."

The boys enjoyed the sail, for the weather could not have been better.
Even old Andy, who seldom said much, seemed delighted with the prospect
of having strange adventures. He had his rifle with him, and, indeed, he
seldom went anywhere that he did not carry it.

"For there's no telling when you may see something you want to shoot or
that ought to be shot," he used to say, "and it's always the man without
a gun who needs it most. So I'm taking no chances."

They sailed all that afternoon without meeting with a craft of any kind.
Straight to the east they went, and when night began to settle down
Washington got supper. It was decided to run slowly after dark until all
hands were more familiar with the ship.

Morning found the _Mermaid_ about a hundred miles from the island where
she had been launched. The night had been uneventful, except that Mark
told Jack he heard some strange noise 