Produced by Charles Bowen. from page scans provided by
Google Books (Harvard University)











Transcriber's Notes:

   1. Page scan source:
      http://books.google.com/books?id=uj6lOyePLCYC
      (Harvard University)

   2. The diphthong oe is represented by [oe]; "a" with a macron
      above by [=a]





                      In the Guardianship of God






                         In the Guardianship

                                of God




                                  BY

                          FLORA ANNIE STEEL

          AUTHOR OF "ON THE FACE OF THE WATERS," "VOICES OF
                THE NIGHT," "HOSTS OF THE LORD," ETC.





                               New York

                        THE MACMILLAN COMPANY

                    LONDON: MACMILLAN & CO., Ltd.

                                 1903

                        _All rights reserved_






                           Copyright, 1908,
                       By THE MACMILLAN COMPANY

                              *   *   *

            Set up, electrotyped, and published May, 1903.





                            Norwood Press
               J. S. Cushing & Co.--Berwick & Smith Co.
                        Norwood, Mass., U.S.A.




                               CONTENTS


       In the Guardianship of God.

       A Bad-character Suit.

       Fire and Ice.

       The Shahbash Wallah.

       The Most Nailing Bad Shot in Creation.

       The Reformer's Wife.

       The Squaring of the Gods.

       The Keeper of the Pass.

       The Perfume of the Rose.

       Little Henry and his Bearer.

       The Hall of Audience.

       In a Fog.

       Gold, Frankincense, and Myrrh.

       Surabhi.

       On the Old Salt Road.

       The Doll-maker.

       The Skeleton Tree.




                      IN THE GUARDIANSHIP OF GOD


"Dittu Sansi, aged twenty-one, theft, six months," read out the
overseer of the gaol, who was introducing a batch of new arrivals to
the doctor in charge of a large gaol in the Upper Provinces of India.
It was early morning. Outside the high mud walls, which looked like
putty and felt like rock, the dew was frosting the grass in the garden
where a few favoured criminals were doing the work of oxen for the
well-wheel, and turning the runnels of fresh water to the patches of
spinach and onion. But here, inside the gaol square, everything had
the parched, arid look of sun-baked mud. Not a speck was to be seen
anywhere; the very prisoners themselves, standing in a long line
awaiting inspection, with their dust-coloured blankets folded upon the
ground in front of them, looked like darker clay images waiting to be
put on their pedestals. There was a touch of colour, however, close to
the arched gateway. First, a red-turbaned warder or two, guarding the
wicket; then half-a-dozen constables in yellow trousers, and a
deputy-inspector of police smart in silver laces and fringes; finally
the gaol _darogah_, or overseer, a stoutish, good-looking Mahomedan
with a tendency to burst out, wherever it was possible, into gay
muslin, and decorate the edges of his regulation white raiment with
fine stitchings. These, with a nondescript group fresh from the
lock-up, were gathered about the plain deal table set in full sunlight
where the Doctor sate, ticking off each arrival on the roster. He
matched the gaol, being dressed from head to foot in dust-coloured
drill, with a wide pith hat which might have been carved out of the
putty walls.

"All right, _Darogah_," he said with a yawn. "Number five hundred and
seven. Go on,--what's the matter?"

Shurruf Deen, the Overseer, was looking intently at the paper in his
hand, and the rich brown of his complacent face seemed to have faded a
little. "Nothing, _Huzoor_," he replied glibly enough, though a quick
observer might have seen the muscles of his brown throat labouring
over the syllables. "The list is badly written, in the broken
character. Thou shouldst speak to the clerk in thine office,
Inspector-_jee_; this name is almost illegible."

"'Tis Shureef, clear enough, _Darogah-jee_," dissented the Inspector,
huffily; "and I should have thought it fits thine own name too close
for--"

"Shureef," read out Shurruf, the Overseer, brusquely, "Shureef, Khoja,
thirty-five, lurking house trespass by night, habitual offender, ten
years."

The Doctor looked up sharply. Ten years meant business; one can teach
a lot in ten years--carpet-weaving, wood-carving, pottery-making--and
the Doctor's hobby was his gaol. What he saw was a man, looking many
years older than his age, haggard and grey, yet despite this with a
lightness and suppleness in every limb. Though this figure was lean
where the Overseer was fat, wrinkled where the Overseer showed smooth,
there was a similarity in the rich colour of their skins, in the
regularity of their features, which made the Englishman turn to look
at the _Darogah_ with the mental remark that the race-characteristics
of India were very instructive; for Shurruf was a Khoja also. "All
right," said the Doctor. "Number five hundred and eight."

"Five hundred and eight," repeated the habitual offender, calmly. "I
will not forget. Salaam, _Huzoor!_ Salaam, _Darogah-jee!_"

"Do you know the man?" asked the Doctor quickly of his subordinate; he
was sharp as a needle, and there had been a note in the salutation
which he did not understand.

"He was in for two years when I was sub-overseer at Loodhiana,
_Huzoor_," replied Shurruf, imperturbably. "He gave much trouble
there; he will not here, since the Doctor-_sahib_ knows how to manage
such as he."

Once more there was an undertone, but the Doctor's attention was
riveted by the adroit flattery, and he rose to begin his inspection
with a smile. It was true; he did know how to manage a gaol, and there
could not possibly be any cause for complaint when he was there to
apportion each ounce of food scientifically, to rout every germ, every
microbe, and treat even contumacy as a disease. The five hundred and
odd prisoners were, as it were, the Doctor's chessmen. He marshalled
them this way and that, checkmating their vile souls and bodies while
they were in his care. If they passed out of it into their own, he
took no heed. They might make what they liked of themselves. But if
they died, and, as the phrase runs, chose the Guardianship of God, he
buried them temporarily in the gaol graveyard with all possible
sanitary precautions, against the time when relations or friends might
appear to claim the corpse. There was no official regulation as to the
limit of time within which such claim could be preferred; but as a
dead body remains in the special Guardianship of God for a year, it
was an understood thing that man should take over the task before the
Almighty gave up the job; it was more satisfactory, especially if the
corpse was a Hindu and had to be burned. As for the Doctor, he would
have preferred to burn the lot, Hindu and Mahomedan alike; failing
that, he--took precautions.

As he walked down the line rapidly his sharp eye noted every detail,
and Shurruf Deen had many a swift, probing question to answer. He
answered them, however, as swiftly, for he was the best gaoler
conceivable; so good that even the Doctor allowed that he was almost
capable of managing the gaol himself. A man of unimpeachable
character, he had yet a curious insight into the minds of the
criminals he guarded, and a singular tact in managing them, so that
his record of continual rise in the world seemed likely to lengthen
itself by an appointment to the most important gaolership in the
Province. Shurruf Deen was working all he knew to secure this, and
therefore, as he followed the Doctor, his keen, bold eyes were
everywhere forestalling the possibility of blame. They fell, among
other things, on Shureef's thin, somewhat bowed figure, as it was
marched off to be shaved, washed, manacled, and dressed to pattern.
Then they turned almost mechanically to the paper he still held.
_Shureef Deen, Khoja--ten years' hard--three months' solitary_. He
gave a faint sigh of relief. Solitary confinement, even when broken up
by philanthropy into blocks of a week, gave time. It meant many
ameliorations to a prisoner's lot which would be unsafe amid the ruck.
Besides no man, he told himself, would be fool enough to risk losing
these favours simply to spite another man.

He repeated this thought aloud that same evening, after lights were
out, and the silence of solitary cells lay all over the gaol, save in
one of the latter, where Shurruf sate whispering to Shureef. In the
utter darkness the curious similarity of the place to a wild beast's
cage, with its inner grating-barred cubicle and its outer high-walled
yard let open to the sky, was lost, and the two men might have been
anywhere. Shurruf, however, sate on the millstones, as being more
suited to his figure, while Shureef crouched on the ground beside the
little heap of corn he was bound to give back ounce for ounce in flour
and bran. And as he crouched, leaning listlessly against the wall, his
supple hand moved among the wheat raising it idly, and as idly letting
it slip back through his thin fingers.

"Fate!" he echoed to something the other said; "nay, 'twas not Fate,
brother, which sent me to thy gaol. I was hard pressed; I am growing
old for the life; it kills men soon. The police would have had me in
the big _dacoity_ case at Delhi despite all; so I bungled one farther
north, to come--where thou wast--brother."

"And thou didst right," assented Shurruf, eagerly; "I can make things
easy for thee."

The wheat slipped with a soft patter, like rain, through Shureef's
fingers. "'Twas not that either which brought me to thy gaol. Listen.
I am far through this life, but another begins. I am not going to
plead _guilty_ there. It is _not guilty_ there, _not guilty_ on the
first count, _not guilty_ as a lad of fifteen for theft--" He paused,
then a faint curiosity came to his listlessness and he looked at the
half-seen figure beside him--"and such a theft! I--I have not done so
mean a one--since--"

Shurruf moved uneasily. "Mayhap not; boys do things men do not. And I
have always--yea! thou knowest it--upheld thee better than some think.
What then? Thy life is past amendment now, save for tobacco and such
like; and these I will give, if thou art wise, for the ten years--"

"I shall not live three months of the ten years, brother," interrupted
Shureef, calmly; and at the words a pang of regret that the solitary
confinement could not be inflicted straight on end shot through
Shurruf's breast, killing the faint remorse the remark had awakened;
it would have simplified matters so much to have Shureef safe from the
possibility of tale-bearing for those three months. "And, as I said, I
want none of these things," went on Shureef; "I only want the truth.
Promise to tell it, and I say naught; wilt promise, brother?"

"No!" whispered Shurruf, fiercely. "What good would it do now?"

"It would make some mourn for me; it would make more than cursing
follow me; it would be evidence for me, a boy, at the Great Court."

The sleek face beside the anxious one took a strange expression, half
joy, half fear. "That is fools' talk. Doth not the Lord know, is He
not just?"

"Yes, He knows," persisted Shureef; "but others must know, else they
will not claim my body, else my grave will not be cooled with tears.
It would not harm thee much, Shurruf. Mayhap 'twould be wiser for thee
not to seek advancement, since one, who might hear if the truth were
told, seeks it also; but if thou stayest in this fat post--"

"Peace, fool!" interrupted Shurruf, passionately. "I will not. Thou
hast no proof, so do thy worst. Thou canst claim me brother if thou
wilt, naught else--" Shureef bent forward and whispered a name in his
ear, making him start back. "It is not true," he went on rapidly; "he
died long since. Think not I do not understand, that I cannot follow
thy evil thoughts. Have I not watched thee these twenty years? Have I
not seen thee sink, and sink, and sink? Can I not guess thy guile--"

"Because it should have been thine own, Shurruf," interrupted his
brother in a new tone. "But let that be. It matters not. I asked this
thing of thee that thou mightest do it freely; if not, I take it--for
I can take it now. I give thee a fortnight to consider; till then I
have no more to say, and thy words will be wasted."

He rose, feeling his way by the wall to the inner cell, and Shurruf,
after pausing a moment uncertainly, stole from the outer one, locking
the door behind him. There were stronger arguments than words at his
command, and he had a fortnight wherein to use them. And use them he
did, unsparingly. The week of solitary confinement which followed, and
the week of work in the general ward, were alternately hell and
comparative heaven; a hell of scant food, work beyond limit, and
punishments; a heaven of tobacco, opium, even a nip of country liquor
now and then; and, as a foretaste of favours to come, there was a day
of work in the gaol-gardens among the cool runnels of water and the
spinach-patches. For the Doctor, having small faith in things beyond
his ken, was dividing the dead who were in the Guardianship of God,
from the living who were in his own; in other words, he was enclosing
a new graveyard beyond the garden, and as this involved work in the
absolute open air, with greater chance of escape, the good-conduct men
from the walled garden were drafted outwards, and their place supplied
from within. But neither fifteen lashes, nor the privilege of smoking
surreptitiously behind a thicket of jasmine and roses, tempted Shureef
from the settled resolve which gave his face a curiously spiritual
look. The Doctor called it something else, and in the private list he
kept of those in his care, put the name of an incurable disease
opposite Shureef's, with this after it: _? three months_--and he did
not try to teach him carpet-weaving or pottery-making.

The Overseer, however, felt that three months was all too long for
him, when, another week of solitary confinement coming round, he
slipped over in the dead of night to Shureef's cell, and found him
once more fingering the corn idly; but as it was a moonlight night
now, he could see the grains of wheat, shining like gold, slip through
the lean fingers.

"It is not much I ask, brother," persisted Shureef, almost gently;
"only that the home folk may claim my body when I die. That is why I
came to thy gaol; for they will not, if the truth be not told, and
only thou canst tell it without flaw. True, I can harm thee, but I
have no wish for that. See! I give thee yet another week for thought.
That is three from three months; but I give no more."

Shurruf Deen went back to his quarters over the big entrance-gate,
where the warders waited on him as if he were a prince, and pondered
over the dilemma in a white heat of indignation. It was so selfish of
Shureef; when God knew, what were a few tears more or less when a man
had deliberately cast away his right to wailing a dozen times over?
What Shureef had said about the first count was true, but what of the
others? What right had he to claim any compensation for that first
injustice? What right had he even to claim commiseration for the
result of a life he had chosen? Yet the Doctor gave it him; he even
ordered him back to the garden after a day or two, with the remark to
the native assistant-surgeon that it was a case of the candle of life
having been burned at both ends. "He might live a year," he said
critically, "but I give him three months; and, of course, he might
drop down dead any day."

He might; if he only would before the week was out, thought Shurruf,
longingly. It would save so much trouble, for though the whole truth
could easily be shirked, it would scarcely be possible to deny the
relationship, or hush up his own share in the youthful escapade. For
there had been sufficient for him to be dismissed by the magistrate
with a reprimand for keeping bad company; and this, added to the
scandal of a notorious criminal claiming kin to him, would militate
against promotion. If Shureef would only drop down dead!

He did. The very day before the week was up he was shot in an
organized attempt at escape on the part of five or six prisoners, who
saw their opportunity in the temporary freedom of garden-work. A very
determined attempt it was, involving violence, in which Shurruf gained
fresh laurels by his promptness in ordering the sentry to fire. One
man was wounded in the arm, and broke his leg in falling back from the
wall he was scaling. Shureef was picked up quite dead behind the
thicket of jasmine and rose. As two or three shots had been fired in
that direction, it was possible it might have been an accident, and
that he was not really one of the plotters; on the other hand both
opium and tobacco were found upon him, proof positive that he had
friends in the gaol. And though the warder, who had connived at the
attempt at escape, and now pleaded guilty in the hope of lessening
punishment, swore that Shureef was not in the plot, he had nothing to
reply when Shurruf asked him for the name of any other gaol official
who tampered with his duty.

"Poor devil!" said the Doctor, musingly, as he finished the necessary
examination. "He was a fool to try--if he did; the run would have
finished him to a certainty. Even the excitement of being in the fun
might have killed him without anything else, for it was worse than I
thought; his heart was mere tissue-paper."

Once more the Overseer's rich brown skin seemed to fade, though he was
glib enough with his tongue. "He is to be buried tonight?" he asked
easily.

"The sooner the better. _His_ friends aren't likely to want him back;
but all the same put him in the new yard." The Doctor's hand, as he
drew up the sheet, finally lingered a bit. "If--if he wanted to get
outside, he may as well, poor devil!"

So in the cool of the evening Shureef, wrapped in a white cloth, was
taken from a solitary cell and given into the Guardianship of God in
the sun-baked patch of earth where he was the first to lie. It was a
desolate patch, bare of everything save a white efflorescence of salt,
showing, as the warder remarked cynically, that it was only fit for
corpses. Not even for them, dissented the diggers, who, with leg-irons
clanking discordantly, lingered over their task while Shureef, a
still, white roll of cloth, waited their pleasure. The soil, they
said, was much harder than in the old place, and if folk were to be
dug up as well as buried--not that any would want the expense of
moving Shureef, whose name was a byword--here the Overseer's portly
figure showed in the adjoining garden, and they hurried on with their
work.

Shurruf did not come over to the grave, however, perhaps because he
was in a demi-toilet of loose muslin, without his turban, and in
charge of his little son, a pretty child of four, whom the obsequious
gardener had presented with a bunch of jasmine and roses, and who,
after a time becoming bored by his father's interest in the spinach
and onions, drifted on by himself to find something more attractive,
until he came to stand wide-eyed and curious in the mourners' place at
the head of the grave. And there he stood silent, watching the
proceedings and keeping a tight clutch on his flowers, until a hand
from behind, dragging him back passionately, sent a shower of earth
over the edge on to Shureef's body which had just been laid in its
last resting-place, and sent also a bunch of roses and jasmines to lie
close to Shureef's heart, for the child dropped them in his fright.

"Weep not, my prince!" cried the warder. "Thou shalt have them again.
Here, some one, go down and hand them up."

But Shurruf, the Overseer, who, with his little son clutched up in his
arms, stood now in the mourners' place, his face almost grey, turned
on the man with a curse. "Let the flowers lie," he said; "there are
plenty more in the garden." So, without another word, he left them to
fill up the grave; and they, having done it, left Shureef with the
flowers on his breast to the Guardianship of God.

And there he stayed month after month, until the year drew close to
its end. And Shurruf Deen stayed in the gaol, for, after all, the man
whose place he had hoped to get was allowed another year's extension
of service. Perhaps it was the deferred hope which told on the
Overseer's nerves; but certain it is that the passing months brought a
strange look of anxiety to his face. Perhaps it was that, though he
had set aside much, he could not quite set aside the thought of that
bunch of roses and jasmine which his little son's hand had thrown upon
Shureef's breast. Something there was in his mind without a doubt,
which made him, but a few weeks before the Guardianship of God must
end, and before the momentous question of promotion must be decided,
steal out more than once at night to Shureef's solitary grave, as he
had stolen to his solitary cell. But the memory of the still, white
roll of cloth with the flowers upon it, touched him more closely than
the memory of the listless figure letting the wheat-grains slip
through its idle fingers. Why it should have done so it were hard to
say. Fear had something to do with it--sheer superstition that when
the Guardianship of God was over, the uncared-for body might fall into
the keeping of the devil and torment him. Love had its part too; love,
and a vague remorse born more of the chance which had made his little
son chief mourner, than of a sense of personal guilt. Plainly it did
not do to try and escape the tie of kindred altogether.

So, by degrees, the thought grew that it would indeed be safer for
Shureef to pass into other guardianship before God's ended. He had
asked for nothing, save that his grave might be cooled by tears; if
this could be compassed, surely he ought to be satisfied, ought to
forget everything else and leave his kindred in peace. And it might be
compassed with care. Shureef's mother--not his own, for they had only
been half-brothers--was alive, alive and blind, and poor too, since
his father, stung by his son's disgrace, had sent her back to her own
people. Poor, blind, and a mother! Here was material ready to his
hand. It would not cost half a month's pay, even with the expenses of
moving the body; and then--yes, then, when they were no longer needed,
those flowers, even if they were dust, as they must be, could be taken
away and forgotten.

It was the anniversary of Shureef's burial, and in the cool of the
evening the clanking leg-irons were once more at work upon his grave;
for, much to the Doctor's disgust, an old woman had put in an
appearance at the last moment with unimpeachable credentials of
relationship and sufficient cash to convey the remains to her village.
There was, as Shurruf, the Overseer, said regretfully, no valid excuse
for refusal, and the Doctor-_sahib_ might rely upon his doing all
things decently and in order, and on strict sanitary principles.
Whereupon the Doctor had smiled grimly, and said that in cases of
resurrection there was safety in extremes.

Nevertheless, it was the love of horrors, no doubt, which made the
gathering round the opening grave so large. The old woman sate in the
mourners' place, her tears flowing already. The others, however,
talked over probabilities, and told tales of former disinterments with
cheerful realism, while Shurruf Deen bustled backwards and forwards
among his elaborate arrangements.

They dug down to one side of the original grave after approved
fashion, so that there should be as little disturbance as possible,
and when traces of what was sought showed in a fold of still, white
shroud, extra cloths were sent down, in which, covering as they
exposed, the workmen gradually swathed all that was mortal of the dead
_dacoit_.

"He hath not lost much weight," said those at the ropes as they
hauled.

So there the task was done, decently and in order. But Shurruf wanted
something which he knew must still lie within the brand-new shroud,
and, ere they lifted the gruesome bundle to the coffin awaiting it, he
stooped,--then stood up suddenly, grey to the very lips, and crushing
something in his hand, something, so it seemed to those around, pink
and white and green. But his face riveted them. "In the Guardianship
of God," he muttered, "in the Guardianship of God."

"What is it?" said one to another, as he stood dazed and speechless.
Then they, too, stooped, looked, touched, until, as he had lain when
they found him behind the rose and jasmine thicket, Shureef lay before
them looking more as if he was asleep than dead.

"_Wah!_" said a voice in the crowd; "he cannot have been so bad as
folk thought him, if the Lord has taken all that care of him."

Shurruf gave a sort of sob, stepped back, lost his footing on the edge
of the open grave and fell heavily. When they picked him up he was
dead.

The Doctor, summoned hastily, shook his head. Death must have been
instantaneous, he said; the neck was broken. After which he went over
and looked at Shureef curiously; then stooped down and picked up some
of the earth on which the body lay, earth which had come from the
bottom of the grave. "Look," he said, pointing out minute white
crystals in it to the native assistant; "that's bi-borate of soda. I
knew there was some of it here when I chose this patch. It's a useful
antiseptic; but he has been in a regular mine of it--a curious case of
embalming, isn't it?"

It certainly was; and it was still more curious that a bunch of fresh
roses and jasmine should have been found on Shurruf Deen the
Overseer's breast, as he lay in Shureef's grave; but, as the Doctor
said, the obsequious gardener had most likely given them to him as he
passed through the spinach and onion patches. And perhaps it was so.




                         A BAD-CHARACTER SUIT


A flood of blistering, yellow sunshine was pouring down on to the
prostrate body of Private George Afford as he lay on his back, drunk,
in an odd little corner between two cook-room walls in the barrack
square; and a stream of tepid water from a skin bag was falling on his
head as Peroo the _bhisti_ stood over him, directing the crystal curve
now on his forehead, now scientifically on his ears. The only result,
however, was that Private George Afford tried unavailingly to scratch
them, then swore unintelligibly.

Peroo twisted the nozzle of the _mussuck_ to dryness, and knelt down
beside the slack strength in the dust. So kneeling, his glistening
curved brown body got mixed up with the glistening curved brown
water-bag he carried, until at first sight he seemed a monstrous
spider preying on a victim, for his arms and legs were skinny.

"_Sahib!_" he said, touching his master on the sleeve. It was a very
white sleeve, and the buttons and belts and buckles all glistened
white or gold in the searching sunlight, for Peroo saw to them,
as he saw to most things about Private Afford's body and soul;
why God knows, except that George Afford had once--for his own
amusement--whacked a man who, for his, was whacking Peroo. He happened
to be one of the best bruisers in the regiment, and George Afford, who
was in a sober bout, wanted to beat him; which he did.

There was no one in sight; nothing in fact save the walls, and an
offensively cheerful castor-oil bush which grew, greener than any
bay-tree, in one angle, sending splay fingers of shadow close to
Private Afford's head as if it wished to aid in the cooling process.
But despite the solitude, Peroo's touch on the white sleeve was
decorous, his voice deference itself.

"_Sahib!_" he repeated. "If the _Huzoor_ does not get up soon, the
Captain will find the master on the ground when he passes to rations.
And that is unnecessary."

He might as well have spoken to the dead. George Afford's face,
relieved of the douche treatment, settled down to placid, contented
sleep. It was not a bad face; and indeed, considering the habits of
the man, it was singularly fine and clear cut; but then in youth it
had evidently been a superlatively handsome one also.

Peroo waited a minute or two, then undid the nozzle of his skin bag
once more, and drenched the slack body and the dust around it.

"What a tyranny is here!" he muttered to himself, the wrinkles on his
forehead giving him the perplexed look of a baby monkey; "yet the
master will die of sunstroke if he be not removed. _Hai, Hai!_ What it
is to eat forbidden fruit and find it a turnip."

With which remark he limped off methodically to the quarter guard and
gave notice that Private George Afford was lying dead drunk between
cook-rooms Nos. 7 and 8; after which he limped on as methodically
about his regular duty of filling the regimental waterpots. What else
was there to be done? The special master whom he had elected to serve
between whiles would not want his services for a month or two at
least, since that period would be spent in clink. For Private George
Afford was a habitual offender.

Such a very habitual offender, indeed, that Evan Griffiths, the second
major, had not a word to say when the Adjutant and the Colonel
conferred over this last offence, though he had stood Afford's friend
many a time; to the extent even of getting him re-enlisted in India--a
most unusual favour--when, after an interval of discharge, he turned
up at his ex-captain's bungalow begging to be taken on; averring,
even, that he had served his way out to India before the mast in that
hope, since enlistment at the Depot might take him to the other
battalion. The story, so the Adjutant had said, was palpably false;
but the silent little Major had got the Colonel to consent; so Private
George Afford--an ideal soldier to look at--had given the master
tailor no end of trouble about the fit of his uniform, for he was a
bit of a dandy when he was sober. But now even Major Griffiths felt
the limit of forbearance was past; nor could a court-martial be
expected to take into consideration the trivial fact which lay at the
bottom of the observant little Major's mercy, namely, that though when
he was sober George Afford was a dandy, when he was drunk--or rather
in the stage which precedes actual drunkenness--he was a gentleman.
Vulgarity of speech slipped from him then; and even when he was
passing into the condition in which there is no speech he would excuse
his own lapses from strict decorum with almost pathetic apologies. "It
is no excuse, I know, sir," he would say with a charming, regretful
dignity, "but I have had a very chequered career--a very chequered
career indeed."

That was true; and one of the black squares of the chessboard of life
was his now, for the court-martial which sentenced Private George
Afford to but a short punishment added the rider that he was to be
thereinafter dismissed from Her Majesty's Service.

"He is quite incorrigible," said the Colonel, "and as we are pretty
certain of going up to punish those scoundrels on the frontier as soon
as the weather cools, we had better get rid of him. The regiment
mustn't have a speck anywhere, and his sort spoils the youngsters."

The Major nodded.

So Private George Afford got his dismissal, also the bad-character
suit of mufti which is the Queen's last gift even to such as he.


                          *   *   *   *   *


It was full six weeks after he had stood beside that prostrate figure
between cook-rooms Nos. 7 and 8 that Peroo was once more engaged in
the same task, though not in the same place.

And this time the thin stream of water falling on George Afford's face
found it grimed and dirty, and left it showing all too clearly the
traces of a fortnight's debauch. For Peroo, being of a philosophic
mind, had told himself, as he had limped away from the quarter guard
after his report, that now, while his self-constituted master would
have no need of his services, was the time for him to take that leave
home which he had deferred so long. Therefore, two or three days after
this event, he had turned up at the Quartermaster's office with the
curious Indian institution, "the changeling," and preferred his
request for a holiday. It was granted, of course; there is no reason
why leave should not be granted when a double, willing even to answer
to the same name, stands ready to step into the original's shoes,
without payment; that remaining a bargain between the doubles.

"Here," said Peroo, "is my brother. He is even as myself. His
character is mine. We are all water-carriers, and he has done the work
for two days. I will also leave him my skin bag, so that the Presence
may be sure it is clean. He is a Peroo also."

He might have been _the_ Peroo so far as the Quartermaster's
requirements went. So the original went home and the copy took his
place; but not for the two months. The order for active service of
which the Colonel had spoken came sooner than was expected, and Peroo,
hearing of it, started back at once for the regiment. A "changeling"
could pass muster in peace, but war required the reality; besides,
the master would, no doubt, be released. He was surely too good
fighting material to be left behind, Peroo told himself; yet there his
hero was, lying in the dust of a bye-alley in the bazaar in a ragged
bad-character suit, while the barrack squares were alive with men, not
half so good to look at, talking, as the mules were laden, of the
deeds they were to do!

The wrinkles on Peroo's forehead grew more like those of a monkey in
arms than ever. This was indeed a tyranny! but at least the Presence
could be moved out of the burning sun this time without, of necessity,
getting him into more trouble. So a few friends were called, and
together they carried George Afford into the windowless slip of a room
which Peroo locked at four o'clock in the morning and unlocked at ten
at night, but which, nevertheless, served him as a home. There was
nothing in it save a string bed and a drinking vessel; for Peroo,
after his kind, ate his food in the bazaar; but that for the present
was all the Englishman required either. So there Peroo left him in the
darkness and the cool, safe for the day.

But after that? The problem went with Peroo as he limped about filling
the cook-room waterpots, for on the morrow he must be filling them on
the first camping-ground, fifteen miles away from that slip of a room
where the master lay. What would become of him then?

The sandy stretches in which the barracks stood were full of mules,
camels, carts, and men of all arms belonging to the small picked force
which was to march with the one solid regiment at dawn on their
mission of punishment.

"_Pani_ (water)," shouted a perspiring artilleryman, grappling with a
peculiarly obstinate mule, as Peroo went past with his skin bag.
"_Pani_, and bring a real _jildi_ (quickness) along with it. W'ot! you
ain't the drinkin'-water, ain't yer? W'ot's that to me? I ain't one o'
yer bloomin' Brahmins; but I'll take it outside instead o' in, because
of them black-silly's o' the doctor's. So turn on the hose, Johnnie;
I'll show you how."

"'E knows all about it, you bet," put in one of the regiment
cheerfully. "Wy, 'e's bin hydraulic engineer and waterworks combined
to that pore chap as got the sack the other day--George Afford--"

"Sure it was a thriflin' mistake wid the prepositions his godfathers
made when they named him; for it was on and not off-erd he was six
days out of sivin," remarked a tall Irishman.

"You hold your jaw, Pat," interrupted another voice. "'E was a better
chap nor most, w'en 'e wasn't on the lap; and, Lordy! 'e could fight
when he 'ad the chanst--couldn't 'e, Waterworks? Just turn that hose
o' yours my way a bit, will yer?"

"_Huzoor_," assented Peroo, deferentially; he understood enough to
make the thought pass through his brain that it was a pity the master
had not the chance. Perhaps the curve of water conveyed this to that
other brain beneath the close, fair curls, whence the drops flew
sparkling in the sunlight. At any rate, their owner went on in a
softer tone--

"Yes, 'e fit--like fits. Looked, too, as if 'e was born ter die on the
field o' glory, and not in a bad-character suit; but, as the parson
says: 'Beauty is vain. I will repay, saith the Lord.'"

The confused morality of this passed Peroo by; and yet something not
altogether dissimilar lay behind his wrinkled forehead when, work
over, he returned to the slip of a room and found Afford vaguely
roused by his entrance.

"I--I am aware it is no possible excuse, sir," came his voice,
curiously refined, curiously pathetic, "but I really have had a very
chequered life, I have indeed."

"_Huzoor_," acquiesced Peroo, briefly; but even that was sufficient to
bring the hearer closer to realities. He sat up on the string bed,
looked about him stupidly, then sank back again.

"Get away! you d----d black devil," he muttered, with a sort of
listless anger. "Can't you let me die in peace, you fool? Can't you
let me die in the gutter, die in a bad-character suit? It's all I'm
fit for--all I'm fit for." Voice, anger, listlessness, all tailed away
to silence. He turned away with a sort of sob, and straightway fell
asleep, for he was still far from sober.

Peroo lit a cresset lamp and stood looking at him. Beauty was
certainly vain here, and if the Lord was going to repay, it was time
He began. Time some one began, at any rate, if the man who had fought
for him, Peroo, was not to carry out his desire of dying in the
gutter--dying in a bad-character suit! The latter misfortune could,
however, be avoided. Things were going cheap in the bazaar that
evening, as was only natural when it was to be deserted for six months
at least, so it ought not to be hard to get the master an exchange for
something more suitable to his beauty, if not to his death.

Five minutes afterwards George Afford, too much accustomed to such
ministrations to be disturbed by the process of undressing, was still
asleep, his chin resting peacefully on Peroo's best white cotton
shawl, and the bad-character suit was on its way to the pawnshop round
the corner. It was nigh on an hour, however, before Peroo, having
concluded his bargain, came back with it, and by the light of the
cresset set to work appraising his success or failure. A success
certainly. The uniform was old, no doubt, but it was a corporal's; and
what is more, it had three good-conduct stripes on the arm. That ought
to give dignity, even to a death in the gutter.

Peroo brought out some pipeclay and pumice-stone from a crevice, and
set to work cheerfully on the buttons and belts, thinking as he worked
that he had indeed made a good bargain. With a judicious smear of
cinnabar here and there, the tunic would be almost as good as the
master's old one--_plus_ the good-conduct stripes, of course, which he
could never have gained in the regiment.

But out of it? If, for instance, the Lord were really to repay Private
George Afford for that good deed in defending a poor lame man?--a good
deed which no bad one could alter for the worse! Peroo on this point
would have been a match for a whole college of Jesuits in casuistry,
as he laid on the pipeclay with lavish hand, and burnished the buttons
till they shone like gold.

It was grey dawn when George Afford woke, feeling a deferential touch
on his shoulder.

"_Huzoor!_" came a familiar voice, "the first bugle has gone. The
_Huzoor_ will find his uniform--a corporal's, with three good-conduct
stripes--is ready. The absence of a rifle is to be regretted; but that
shall be amended if the _Huzoor_ will lend a gracious ear to the plan
of his slave. In the meantime a gifting of the _Huzoor's_ feet for the
putting on of stockings might be ordered."

George Afford thrust out a foot mechanically, and sate on the edge of
the string bed staring stupidly at the three good-conduct stripes on
the tunic, which was neatly folded beside him.

"It is quite simple," went on the deferential voice. "The _Huzoor_ is
going to march with the colours, but he will be twelve hours behind
them; that is all. He will get the fighting, and by-and-by, when the
killing comes and men are wanted, the Colonel-_sahib_ may give a
place; but, in any case, there will always be the fighting. For the
rest, I, the _Huzoor's_ slave, will manage; and as there will, of
necessity, be no canteen, there can be no tyranny. Besides, since
there is not a cowrie in the master's jacket, what else is he to do?"

The last argument was unanswerable. George Afford thrust out his other
foot to be shod for this new path, and stared harder than ever at the
good-conduct stripes.

That night, despite the fatigues of a first day in camp, Peroo trudged
back along the hard white road to meet some one whom he expected; for
this was the first step, and he had, perforce, been obliged to leave
his charge to his own devices for twelve hours amid the distractions
of the bazaar. Still, without a cowrie in his pocket--Peroo had
carefully extracted the few annas he had found in one--a man was more
or less helpless, even for evil.

Despite this fact, there was a lilt in the lagging step which, just as
Peroo had begun to give up hope of playing Providence, came slowly
down the road. It belonged to George Afford, in the gentlemanly stage
of drink. He had had a chequered life, he said almost tearfully, but
there were some things a man of honour could not do. He could not
break his promise to an inferior--a superior was another matter. In
that case he paid for it honestly. But he had promised Peroo--his
inferior--to come. So here he was; and that was an end of it.

It seemed more than once during the next few hours as if the end had,
indeed, come. But somehow Peroo's deferential hand and voice
extricated those tired uncertain feet, the weary sodden brain, from
ditches and despair; still it was a very sorry figure which Peroo's
own hasty footsteps left behind, safely quartered for the day in a
shady bit of jungle, while he ran on to overtake the rear-guard if he
could. The start, however, had been too much for his lameness, and he
was a full hour late at his work; which, of course, necessitated his
putting in an excuse. He chose drunkenness, as being nearest the
truth, was fined a day's wages, and paid it cheerfully, thinking with
more certainty of the sleeping figure he had left in the jungles.

The afternoon sun was slanting through the trees before it stirred,
and George Afford woke from the sleep of fatigue superadded to his
usual sedative. He felt strangely refreshed, and lay on his back
staring at the little squirrels yawning after their midday snooze in
the branches above him. And then he laughed suddenly, sate up and
looked about him half confusedly. Not a trace of humanity was to be
seen; nothing but the squirrels, a few green pigeons, and down in the
mirror-like pool behind the trees--a pool edged by the percolating
moisture from the water with faint spikes of sprouting grass--a couple
of egrets were fishing lazily. Beyond lay a bare sandy plain, backed
by faint blue hills--the hills where fighting was to be had. Close at
hand were those three good-conduct stripes.

That night Peroo had not nearly so far to go back along the broad
white road; yet the step which came echoing down it, if steadier,
lagged more. Nor was Peroo's task much easier, for George Afford--in
the abject depression which comes to the tippler from total
abstinence--sate down in the dust more than once, and swore he would
not go another step without a dram. Still, about an hour after dawn,
he was once more dozing in a shady retreat with a pot of water and
some dough cakes beside him, while Peroo, in luck, was getting a lift
to the third camping-ground.

But even at the second, where the sleeping figure remained, the
country was wilder, almost touching the "skirts of the hills," and so,
when George Afford roused himself--as the animals rouse themselves to
meet the coming cool of evening--a ravine deer was standing within
easy shot, looking at him with head thrown back and wide, startled
nostrils, scenting the unknown.

The sight stirred something in the man which had slept the sleep of
the dead for years; that keen delight of the natural man, not so much
in the kill as in the chase; not so much in the mere chase itself as
in its efforts--its freedom. He rose, stretching his long arms in what
was half a yawn, half a vague inclination to shake himself free of
some unseen burden.

But that night he swore at Peroo for leading him a fool's dance; he
threatened to go back. He was not so helpless as all that. He was not
a slave; he would have his tot of rum like any other soldier as--

"_Huzoor_," interrupted Peroo, deferentially, "this slave is aware
that many things necessary to the _Huzoor's_ outfit as a soldier
remain to be produced. But with patience all may be attained. Here, by
God's grace, is the rifle. One of us--Smith-_sahib_ of G Company,
_Huzoor_--found freedom to-day. He was reconnoitring with Griffiths,
Major-_sahib_, when one of these hell-doomed _Sheeahs_--whom Heaven
destroy--shot him from behind a rock--"

Private George Afford seemed to find his feet suddenly. "Smith of G
Company?" he echoed in a different voice.

"_Huzoor!_--the _sahib_ whom the _Huzoor_ thrashed for thrashing this
slave--"

"Poor chap!" went on George Afford, as if he had not heard. "So
they've nicked him--but we'll pay 'em out--we--" His fingers closed
mechanically on the rifle Peroo was holding out to him.


                          *   *   *   *   *


It was a fortnight after this, and the camp lay clustered closely in
the mouth of a narrow defile down which rushed a torrent swollen from
the snows above; a defile which meant decisive victory or defeat to
the little force which had to push their way through it to the heights
above. Yet, though death, maybe, lay close to each man, the whole camp
was in an uproar because Major Griffiths' second pair of _putties_ had
gone astray. The other officers had been content with one set of these
woollen bandages which in hill-marching serve as gaiters, and help so
much to lessen fatigue; but the Major, being methodical, had provided
against emergencies. And now, when, with that possibility of death
before him, his soul craved an extreme order in all things, his clean
pair had disappeared. Now the Major, though silent, always managed to
say what he meant. So it ran through the camp that they had been
stolen, and men compared notes over the fact in the mess-tent and in
the canteen.

In the former, the Adjutant with a frown admitted that of late there
had been a series of inexplicable petty thefts in camp, which had
begun with the disappearance of Private Smith's rifle. That might
perhaps be explained in an enemy's country, but what the deuce anybody
could want with a pair of bone shirt-studs--

"And a shirt," put in a mournful voice.

"_Item_ a cake of scented soap," said another.

"And a comb," began a third.

The Colonel, who had till then preserved a discreet silence, here
broke in with great heat to the Adjutant.

"Upon my soul, sir, it's a disgrace to the staff, and I must insist on
a stringent inquiry the instant we've licked these hill-men. I--I
didn't mean to say anything about it--but I haven't been able to find
my tooth-brush for a week."

Whereupon there was a general exodus into the crisp, cold air outside,
where the darkness would hide inconvenient smiles, for the Colonel was
one of those men who have a different towel for their face and hands.

The stars were shining in the cleft between the tall, shadowy cliffs
which rose up on either side, vague masses of shadow on which--seen
like stars upon a darker sky--the watchfires of the enemy sparkled
here and there. The enemy powerful, vigilant; and yet beside the
camp-fires close at hand the men had forgotten the danger of the
morrow in the trivial loss of the moment, and were discussing the
Major's _putties_.

"It's w'ot I say all along," reiterated the romancer of G Company. "It
begun ever since Joey Smith was took from us at Number Two camp. It's
'is ghost--that's w'ot it is. 'Is ghost layin' in a _trew-so_. Jest
you look 'ere! They bury 'im, didn't they? as 'e was--decent like in
coat and pants--no more. Well! since then 'e's took 'is rifle off us,
an' a greatcoat off D Company, and a knapsack off A."

"Don't be lavin' out thim blankets he tuk from the store, man,"
interrupted the tall Irishman. "Sure it's a testhimony to the pore
bhoy's character annyhow that he shud be wantin' thim where he is."

"It is not laughing at all at such things I would be, whatever," put
in another voice seriously, "for it is knowing of such things we are
in the Highlands--"

"Hold your second sight, Mac," broke in a third; "we don't want none
o' your shivers tonight. You're as bad as they blamed niggers, and
they swear they seen Joey more nor once in a red coat dodging about
our rear."

"Well! they won't see 'im no more, then," remarked a fourth
philosophically, "for 'e change 'is tailor. Leastways, 'e got a
service khakee off Sergeant Jones the night afore last; the Sergeant
took his Bible oath to 'ave it off Joey Smith's ghost, w'en 'e got
time to tackle 'im, if 'e 'ave ter go to 'ell for it."

Major Griffiths meantime was having a similar say as he stood,
eye-glass in eye, at the door of the mess-tent. "Whoever the thief
is," he admitted, with the justice common to him, "he appears to have
the instincts of a gentleman; but, by Gad, sir, if I find him he shall
know what it is to take a field officer's gaiters."

Whereupon he gave a dissatisfied look at his own legs, a more
contented one at the glimmering stars of the enemy's watchfires, and
then turned in to get a few hours' rest before the dawn.

But some one a few miles farther down the valley looked both at his
legs and at the stars with equal satisfaction. Some one, tall, square,
straight, smoking a pipe--some one else's pipe, no doubt--beside the
hole in the ground where, on the preceding night, th