YOUNG READERS
                              Atom Mystery
                         [YOUNG ATOM DETECTIVE]


                           By CHARLES COOMBS

                             ILLUSTRATED BY
                             G. DEAN LEWIS

             _Publishers_ GROSSET & DUNLAP, INC. _New York_

                      ©1958 BY LANTERN PRESS, INC.
                Under the title: “YOUNG ATOM DETECTIVE”
                BY ARRANGEMENT WITH LANTERN PRESS, INC.
              MANUFACTURED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA




                                CONTENTS


  CHAPTER ONE                                                         11
  CHAPTER TWO                                                         27
  CHAPTER THREE                                                       45
  CHAPTER FOUR                                                        58
  CHAPTER FIVE                                                        72
  CHAPTER SIX                                                         89
  CHAPTER SEVEN                                                      107
  CHAPTER EIGHT                                                      117
  CHAPTER NINE                                                       135
  CHAPTER TEN                                                        151
  CHAPTER ELEVEN                                                     161
  CHAPTER TWELVE                                                     172




                             ILLUSTRATIONS


                                                                    Page
  _“Hi, there,” Eddie greeted, “Any luck?”_                           51
  “_Come on, Eddie, let’s go back._”                                 104
  _The cylinder was simple to locate._                               137
  _... he saw the small rubber boat moving in._                      179




                             YOUNG READERS
                              Atom Mystery




                              CHAPTER ONE


It was only a dream. Eddie Taylor would like to have finished it, but
the bar of morning sunlight poking in under the window shade pried his
eyes open. The dream fled. Eddie kicked off the sheet, swung his feet to
the floor, and groped under the bed for his tennis shoes.

He heard his father’s heavy footsteps in the hallway. They stopped
outside of his bedroom door.

“You awake, Eddie?”

“I’m awake, Dad,” Eddie answered.

“Breakfast’s ready. Get washed and dressed.”

“Be right there,” Eddie said. Then, remembering the dream, he added,
“Oh, Dad, is it all right if I use the Geiger counter today?”

Mr. Taylor opened the door. He was a big man, broad-shouldered and still
thin-waisted. Eddie found it easy to believe the stories he had heard
about his father being an outstanding football player in his time. Even
his glasses and the gray hair at his temples didn’t add much age,
although Eddie knew it had been eighteen years since his father had
played his last game of college football.

“You may use the Geiger counter any time you want, Eddie,” Mr. Taylor
said, “as long as you take good care of it. You figured out where you
can find some uranium ore?”

Eddie smiled sheepishly. “I—I had a dream,” he said. “Plain as day. It
was out on Cedar Point. I was walking along over some rocks. Suddenly
the Geiger counter began clicking like everything.”

“Cedar Point?” his father asked. “I’ve never been out there. But, from
what I hear, there are plenty of rock formations. Might be worth a try,
at that. You never can tell where you might strike some radioactivity.”

“Do you believe in dreams, Dad?”

“Well, now, that’s a tough question, son. I can’t say that I really do.
Still, one clue is as good as another when it comes to hunting uranium
ore, I guess. But right now we’d better get out to breakfast before your
mother scalps us. Hurry it up.” His father turned and went back down the
hallway toward the kitchen.

Eddie pulled on his trousers and T shirt and went into the bathroom. He
washed hurriedly, knowing that even if he missed a spot or two, he was
fairly safe. During the summer months his freckles got so thick and dark
that it would take a magnifying glass to detect any small smudges of
dirt hiding among them. He plastered some water on his dark-red hair,
pushed a comb through it, and shrugged as it snapped back almost to its
original position. Oh, well, he had tried.

He grinned into the mirror, reached a finger into his mouth, and
unhooked the small rubber bands from his tooth braces. He dropped them
into the waste basket. He’d put fresh ones in after breakfast.

He brushed his teeth carefully, taking particular pains around the metal
braces. The tooth-straightening orthodontist had warned him about
letting food gather around the metal clamps. It could start cavities.

Finished, Eddie went out to breakfast.

“Good morning, dear,” his mother greeted him, handing him a plate of
eggs.

“Hi, Mom,” Eddie said. “Gotta hurry. Big day today.”

“So your father says. But I’m afraid your big day will have to start
with sorting out and tying up those newspapers and magazines that have
been collecting in the garage.”

“Aw, Mom—”

“Eddie, I asked you to do it three days ago. Remember? And the Goodwill
truck comes around today.”

“But, Mom—”

“No arguments, son,” his father put in calmly but firmly. “School
vacation doesn’t mean that your chores around here are on vacation, too.
Get at it right away, and you’ll still have time to hunt your uranium.

“Well,” Mr. Taylor added, excusing himself from the table, “I’d better
be getting over to school. I’m expecting to receive shipment of a new
radioisotope today.”

The very word excited Eddie. In fact, anything having to do with atomic
science excited him. He knew something about isotopes—pronounced
_eye-suh-tope_. You couldn’t have a father who was head of the
atomic-science department at Oceanview College without picking up a
little knowledge along the way. Eddie knew that a radioisotope was a
material which had been “cooked” in an atomic reactor until it was “hot”
with radioactivity. When carefully controlled, the radiation stored up
in such isotopes was used in many beneficial ways.

“Why don’t college professors get summer vacations, too?” Eddie asked.
One reason for asking that particular question was to keep from prying
deeper into the subject of the radioisotope. Much of his father’s work
at Oceanview College was of a secret nature. Eddie had learned not to
ask questions about it. His father usually volunteered any information
he wanted known, so Eddie stuck to questions which could and would be
answered.

“We get vacations,” his father said. “But—well, my work is a little
different, you know. At the speed atomic science is moving today, we
simply can’t afford to waste time. But don’t worry. We’ll take a week or
so off before school starts in the fall. Maybe head for the mountains
with our tent and sleeping bags.”

“And Geiger counter?” Eddie asked eagerly.

“Wouldn’t think of leaving it home,” his father said, smiling. “By the
way, I put new batteries in it the other day. Take it easy on them.
Remember to switch it off when you’re not actually using it.”

“I will,” Eddie promised. He had forgotten several times before,
weakening the batteries.

It took Eddie over an hour to sort out the newspapers and magazines in
the garage, tie them in neat bundles, and place them out on the front
curb for the Goodwill pickup. By that time the sun was high overhead. It
had driven off the coolness which the ocean air had provided during the
earlier hours.

“Anything else, Mom?” he asked, returning to the house and getting the
Geiger counter out of the closet. He edged toward the back door before
his mother had much time to think of something more for him to do.

“I guess not, dear,” Mrs. Taylor said, smiling over his hasty retreat.
“What are you going to do?”

“Think I’ll do a little prospecting,” Eddie said.

“Where?”

“Probably in the hills beyond the college,” Eddie said. The more he
thought about it, the more he realized it was a little late in the day
to go to Cedar Point. The best way to get there was by rowboat across
Moon Bay, and that was too long a row to be starting now. Besides, there
were plenty of other places around the outskirts of Oceanview where
likely looking rock formations invited search with a Geiger counter.

“Are you going alone?” his mother asked.

“Oh, guess I’ll stop by and see if Teena wants to go,” Eddie answered
casually. He tried to make it sound as though he would be doing Teena
Ross a big favor. After all, she was only a girl. Eddie didn’t figure a
girl would make a very good uranium prospecting partner, but most of the
fellows he knew were away at camp, or vacationing with their folks, or
something like that.

“She’ll enjoy it, I’m sure,” his mother said.

“I’ll take Sandy, too,” Eddie said. “He needs the exercise.”

“That’s a good idea, dear. Be back in time for an early dinner.”

Eddie let Sandy off his chain. The taffy-colored cocker spaniel yipped
wildly over his freedom, racing back and forth as Eddie started down the
street.

Christina Ross—whom everybody called Teena—lived at the far end of the
block. Eddie went around to the side door of the light-green stucco
house and knocked.

“Oh, hi, Eddie,” Teena greeted him, appearing at the screen door. “I was
hoping you’d come over.”

“Well, I—I just happened to be going by,” Eddie said. “Thought you might
want to watch me do a little prospecting with the Geiger counter. But
maybe you’re too busy.”

That’s how to handle it, Eddie thought. Don’t act anxious. Let Teena be
anxious. Then maybe she’ll even offer to bring along a couple of
sandwiches or some fruit.

“Oh, I’d love to go,” Teena said eagerly, “but I’m just finishing the
dishes. Come on in.”

“I’m in kind of a hurry.”

“I’ll only be a minute.” She pushed the screen door open for him. “I’ll
make us some sandwiches.”

“Stay here, Sandy,” Eddie said. “Sit.” The dog minded, although he
looked a bit rebellious.

Eddie went inside and followed Teena to the kitchen. He felt triumphant
about the sandwiches.

Teena tossed him a dish towel. “You dry them,” she said.

“Who, me?”

“Why not? You’re in a hurry, aren’t you? I can make the sandwiches while
you dry the silverware.” She smiled, putting tiny crinkles in her small,
slightly upturned nose. She wore her hair in a pony tail. Even though
her hair was blond all year long, it seemed even lighter in the summer.
Eddie couldn’t tell whether the sun had faded it, or whether her deep
summer tan simply made her hair look lighter by contrast. Maybe both.

“Hello, Eddie,” Mrs. Ross said, coming into the kitchen. “Looks like
Teena put you to work.”

“She always does, Mrs. Ross,” Eddie said, pretending great injury.
“Don’t know why I keep coming over here.”

“I know,” Teena spoke up quickly. “It’s because we’re friends, that’s
why.”

Eddie knew she was right. They were friends—good friends. They had been
ever since Eddie’s family had moved to Oceanview and his father had
become head of the college’s atomic-science department. In fact, their
parents were close friends, also. Teena’s father was chief engineer for
the Acme Aviation Company, one of the coast town’s largest manufacturing
concerns.

“Well, I’ll be glad to finish them, Eddie,” Mrs. Ross offered. “I know
how boys detest doing dishes.”

“Oh, I don’t really mind, Mrs. Ross,” Eddie said. “Besides, Teena’s
making sandwiches to take with us.”

“Another prospecting trip?” Teena’s mother glanced at the Geiger counter
which Eddie had set carefully on the dinette table.

“I still think there must be some uranium around here,” Eddie insisted.
“And we can find it if anyone can.”

“I agree,” Mrs. Ross said. “But even if you don’t find it, you both seem
to enjoy your hikes.”

“Oh, yes, it’s fun, Mother,” Teena replied, wrapping wax paper around a
sandwich. “Guess I’m ready. I’ve got a bone for Sandy, too.”

“Don’t go too far out from town,” Mrs. Ross cautioned, as Eddie picked
up the Geiger counter. “And stick near the main roads. You know the
rules.”

“We sure do, Mrs. Ross,” Eddie assured her. “And we’ll be back early.”

They walked past the college campus, and toward the rocky foothills
beyond. At various rock mounds and outcroppings, Eddie switched on the
Geiger counter. The needle of the dial on the black box wavered
slightly. A slow clicking came through the earphones, but Eddie knew
these indicated no more than a normal background count. There were
slight traces of radioactivity in almost all earth or rocks. It was in
the air itself, caused by mysterious and ever-present cosmic rays, so
there was always a mild background count when the Geiger counter was
turned on; but to mean anything, the needle had to jump far ahead on the
gauge, and the clicking through the earphones had to speed up until it
sounded almost like bacon frying in a hot skillet.

There was none of that today. After they had hiked and searched most of
the forenoon, Eddie said, “We might as well call it a day, Teena.
Doesn’t seem to be anything out here.”

“It’s all right with me,” Teena agreed, plucking foxtails from Sandy’s
ears. “Pretty hot, anyway. Let’s eat our sandwiches and go back home.”

“All right,” Eddie said. “You know, one of these days I’d like to go out
to Cedar Point and scout around. Maybe we’ll find something there.” Then
he told Teena about his dream.

Teena smiled. “A dream sure isn’t much to go on,” she said, “but they
say it’s pretty out on Cedar Point. I’ll go any time you want to,
Eddie.” She handed him one of the sandwiches.

It was midafternoon by the time they arrived back at Teena’s house. They
worked a while on a new jigsaw puzzle Teena had received on a recent
birthday. Then Eddie said good-by and went on down the street toward his
own home.

After putting Sandy on his long chain and filling his water dish, Eddie
went in the back door. He put the Geiger counter in the closet and went
into the kitchen.

“What’s for dinner, Mom?” he asked.

Mrs. Taylor turned from the sink. Eddie knew at once, just seeing the
expression on his mother’s face, that something was wrong.

“Dinner?” his mother said absently. “It’s not quite four o’clock yet,
Eddie. Besides, dinner may be a little late today.”

“But this morning you said it would be early,” Eddie reminded her,
puzzled.

“This morning I didn’t know what might happen.”

Then Eddie heard the sound of his father’s voice coming from the den.
There was a strange urgent tone in it. The door to the den was open.
Eddie went through the dining room and glanced into the den. His father
sat stiffly behind his homemade desk, talking rapidly into the
telephone. Eddie caught only the last few sketchy words. Then his father
placed the telephone in its cradle, glanced up, and saw Eddie.

If there had been even the slightest doubt in Eddie’s mind about
something being wrong, it vanished now. Mr. Taylor looked years older
than he had that very morning. Worry lay deep in his eyes. He fumbled
thoughtfully with a pencil, turning it end over end on his desk.

“Hello, son,” he said. He didn’t even ask whether Eddie had discovered
any uranium ore that day. Always before, he had shown genuine interest
in Eddie’s prospecting trips.

“Dad,” Eddie said anxiously, “what—what’s the matter?”

“It shows that much, does it, son?” his father said tiredly.

“What’s wrong, Dad?” Eddie prompted. “Or can’t you tell me?”

Mr. Taylor leaned back. “Quite a bit’s wrong, Eddie,” he said, “and I
guess there’s no reason why I shouldn’t tell you. It’ll be in the
evening papers, anyway.”

“Evening papers?”

“Eddie, you remember me mentioning this morning about that radioisotope
shipment I was expecting today?”

“I remember,” Eddie said. “Did it come?”

“It did—and it didn’t,” his father said.

“What does that mean, Dad?” Eddie asked, puzzled.

“The delivery truck arrived at the school with it,” his father
explained, “but while the driver was inquiring where to put it, the
container disappeared.”

“Disappeared?”

“The radioisotope was stolen, Eddie,” his father said slowly. “Stolen
right out from under our noses!”




                              CHAPTER TWO


At the moment, Eddie didn’t pry for further information on the theft of
the valuable radioactive isotope. His father had plenty on his mind, as
it was. The main information was in the evening _Globe_, which Eddie
rushed out to get as soon as he heard it plop onto the front porch.

He took the newspaper to his father to read first. After having
finished, Mr. Taylor handed the paper to Eddie and leaned back
thoughtfully in his chair.

“They’ve got it pretty straight, at that,” Mr. Taylor said, “but I’m
afraid this is going to stir up quite a bit of trouble.”

“It wasn’t your fault, was it, Dad?” Eddie defended.

“It was as much mine as anybody’s, son,” his father said. “Probably more
so. After all, I am head of the department. I knew about the shipment.
That should make it my responsibility to see that it was properly
received and placed in our atomic-materials storage vault. But there is
little point in trying to place the blame on anyone. I’m willing to
accept that part of it. The important thing is that we recover that
radioisotope. Not only is it of a secret nature, but it is also
dangerously radioactive if improperly handled.”

“But—but wasn’t it in a safe container?” Eddie asked.

“Of course,” his father said. “There were only two ounces of it in a
fifty-pound lead capsule. As long as it remains in that capsule it’s
safe. As you know, the lead prevents any radiation from escaping. Out of
that capsule, however, those two ounces of radioisotope can be very
dangerous.”

“Fifty pounds,” Eddie said thoughtfully. “That’s a pretty big thing to
steal, isn’t it?”

“Not when it’s lead, son,” his father replied. “Not much bigger than a
two-quart milk bottle, in fact.”

“Even at that, no kid could have taken it,” Eddie said.

“Kid?” His father smiled thinly. “We don’t think it was any kid, Eddie.
Not by a long shot. The whole thing was carefully planned and carefully
carried out. It was not the work of amateurs.”

Eddie read the newspaper account. The small truck from Drake Ridge,
where one of the country’s newest atomic reactors was located, had
arrived earlier than expected at Oceanview College. It had backed up to
the receiving dock where all of the college supplies were delivered.
Since deliveries during vacation months were few, there was no one on
the dock when the truck arrived. A half hour later, when the delivery
was expected, there would have been. The truck’s early arrival had
caught them unprepared.

The driver had left the truck and had gone around the building to the
front office. It had taken him less than five minutes to locate the
receiving-dock foreman. Together, they had returned through the small
warehouse and opened the rear door onto the dock.

During that short time someone had pried open the heavy padlock on the
delivery truck’s rear door and had stolen the fifty-pound lead capsule
containing the radioisotope.

Dusty footprints on the pavement around the rear of the truck indicated
that two men had carried out the theft. A heavy iron pry bar had been
dropped at the rear of the truck after the lock was sprung. It was a
common type used by carpenters. There were no fingerprints or other
identifying marks on it. The footprints were barely visible and of no
help other than to indicate that two men were involved in the crime.

“Dad,” Eddie asked, looking up from the paper, “how could anyone carry
away something weighing fifty pounds without being noticed?”

“Chances are they had their car parked nearby,” his father said. “As you
know, there are no fences or gates around Oceanview College. People come
and go as they please. As a matter of fact, there are always quite a few
automobiles parked around the shipping and receiving building, and
parking space is scarce even during summer sessions. Anyone could park
and wait there unnoticed. Or they could walk around without attracting
any undue attention.”

“But, Dad,” Eddie continued, “how would the men know that the delivery
truck would arrive a half hour early?”

“They wouldn’t,” his father said. “They may have had another plan. The
way things worked out, they didn’t need to use it. The early delivery
and the business of leaving the truck unguarded for a few minutes
probably gave them a better opportunity than they had expected. At
least, they took quick advantage of it.”

“I don’t see what anyone would want with a radioisotope,” Eddie said.
“Maybe they figured there was something else inside of that lead
capsule.”

“That’s unlikely, son,” Mr. Taylor said. “Believe me, it was no common
theft. Nor were the thieves ordinary thieves. That isotope was a new
one. A very secret one. Our job at the college was to conduct various
tests with it in order to find out exactly how it could best be put to
use as a cure for disease, or for sterilizing food, or even as a source
of power.”

“Power?” Eddie said. “Boy, it must have been a strong isotope.” He knew
that the strength of radioisotopes could be controlled largely by the
length of time they were allowed to “cook” in an atomic reactor and soak
up radioactivity.

“We weren’t planning to run a submarine with it,” his father said. “It
wasn’t that strong. Still, it doesn’t take so very much radioactivity to
make two ounces of an isotope quite powerful—and quite deadly. I only
hope whoever stole it knows what he’s doing. However, I’m sure he does.”

“You mean he must have been an atomic scientist himself?” Eddie asked.

“Let’s just say he—or both of them—have enough training in the subject
to know how to handle that isotope safely,” Mr. Taylor said.

“But, Dad,” Eddie wondered, “what could they do with it?”

“They could study it,” his father explained. “At least, they could send
it somewhere to be broken down and studied. Being a new isotope, the
formula is of great value.”

“What do you mean, send it somewhere?” Eddie asked.

“Perhaps to some other country.”

“Then—then you mean whoever stole it were spies!” Eddie exclaimed
breathlessly.

“That’s entirely possible,” his father said. “In fact, it’s the only
logical explanation I can think of. People simply don’t go around
stealing radioactive isotopes without a mighty important reason.”

“Dinner’s ready,” Eddie’s mother called from the kitchen.

During dinner Eddie wasn’t sure just what he was eating. The idea of
spies stealing atomic materials kept building up in his mind. By the
time dessert was finished, he was anxious to talk with someone, yet he
knew he shouldn’t bother his father with any more questions. He asked if
he could go over and visit with Teena for a while.

“Well, you were together most of the day,” his mother said, “but I guess
it’s all right. Be back in about an hour, though.”

It was a balmy evening. On such evenings, he and Teena sometimes walked
along the beach barefoot, collecting sea shells. Today Eddie had no
desire to do that. He ran down the block.

Teena answered his knock.

“Come on in, Eddie,” she invited, seeming surprised to see him. “Mother
and I are just finishing dinner.”

“Oh, I figured you’d be through by now,” Eddie apologized, following her
inside.

“Hello, Eddie,” Mrs. Ross said, but she didn’t seem as cheerful as
usual.

“Good evening, Mrs. Ross,” Eddie said. “I—I hope I’m not making a pest
of myself.” He looked around for Mr. Ross, but Teena’s father apparently
hadn’t arrived home from Acme Aircraft yet. There wasn’t a place set for
him at the table, either.

“You’re never a pest, Eddie,” Mrs. Ross assured him. “I was going to
call your mother in a little while about that newspaper write-up.”

“Oh, you read it?” Eddie said.

“How could anyone miss it?” Teena said. “Right on the front page.”

“I suppose your father is quite concerned over it,” Teena’s mother said.

“Oh, yes,” Eddie affirmed. “He was the one who ordered the isotope.”

“What’s an isotope?” Teena asked.

“I’m not sure I know, either,” Mrs. Ross said. “Maybe we could
understand more of what it’s all about if you could explain what a
radioisotope is, Eddie.”

“Well,” Eddie said slowly, “it’s not easy to explain, but I’ll try. You
know how rare uranium is. There’s not nearly enough of it to fill all
the needs for radioactive materials. Besides, pure uranium is so
powerful and expensive and dangerous to handle that it’s not a very good
idea to try using it in its true form. So they build an atomic reactor
like the one at Drake Ridge.”

“We’ve driven by it,” Mrs. Ross said. “My, it’s a big place.”

“I’ll say,” Eddie agreed. “Of course, only one building holds the
reactor itself. It’s the biggest building near the center.”

“I remember it,” Teena said.

“Well, the reactor is about four stories high,” Eddie went on. “They
call it a uranium ‘pile.’ It’s made up of hundreds and hundreds of
graphite bricks. That’s where they get the name ‘pile’—from brick pile.
Anyway, scattered around in between the bricks are small bits of
uranium. Uranium atoms are radioactive. That is, they keep splitting up
and sending out rays.”

“Why do they do that?” Teena asked.

“It’s just the way nature made uranium, I guess,” Eddie said. “Most
atoms stay in one piece, although they move around lickety-split all of
the time. Uranium atoms not only move around, but they break apart. They
shoot out little particles called neutrons. These neutrons hit other
atoms and split them apart, sending out more neutrons. It’s a regular
chain reaction.”

“I’ve heard of chain reactions,” Mrs. Ross said.

“Well, with all of the splitting up and moving around of the uranium
atoms,” Eddie went on, “an awful lot of heat builds up. If they don’t
control it—well, you’ve seen pictures of atomic-bomb explosions. That’s
a chain reaction out of control.”

“Out of control is right,” Teena said.

“But the atomic piles control the reaction,” Eddie said. “The graphite
bricks keep the splitting-up atoms apart so one neutron won’t go
smashing into other atoms unless they want it to. They have ways of
controlling it so that only as much radiation builds up as they want.
You can even hear the reactor hum as the radioactive rays go tearing
through it. But by careful tending, the scientists keep the atomic
collisions far enough apart so the thing doesn’t blow up.”

“Boy, that sounds dangerous,” Teena said.

“Well, they know just how to do it,” Eddie replied.

“Aren’t the rays dangerous?” Mrs. Ross asked.

“I’ll say they’re dangerous,” Eddie said. “But the whole pile is covered
by a shield of concrete about eight feet thick. That keeps the rays from
getting out and injuring the workmen.”

“Goodness. Eight feet is a lot of cement.”

“It takes a lot to stop radioactive atomic particles,” Eddie explained.
“Especially the gamma rays. They’re the fastest and most dangerous, and
the hardest to stop. Alpha and beta rays are fairly easy to stop. But
the gamma rays are regular high-velocity invisible bullets. They’ll go
right through a stone wall unless it’s plenty thick. Of course, you
can’t see them. Not with even the most powerful microscope in the
world.”

“I wouldn’t want to work around a place where I might get shot at by—by
dangerous rays you can’t even see,” Teena said.

“I would,” Eddie said. “Everyone is carefully protected. They see to
that. Well, anyway, if all of those uranium atoms were shooting
radioactive rays around inside of that pile and doing nothing, there
would be an awful lot of energy going to waste. So the atomic scientists
take certain elements which aren’t radioactive, but can be made
radioactive, and shove small pieces of them into holes drilled in the
pile.”

“Isn’t that dangerous?” Teena asked.

“They don’t shove them in with their bare hands,” Eddie said, trying not
to show exasperation. “They use long holders to push the small chunks of
material into the holes in the reactor. Then, as those uranium atoms
keep splitting up and shooting particles around inside of the pile, some
of them smack into the chunks of material, and stick there. Most
elements will soak up radiation, just like a sponge soaks up water.”

“My, that’s interesting, Eddie,” Mrs. Ross said.

“I’ve seen them do it,” Eddie said proudly, then added, “from behind a
protective shield, of course. When the material has soaked up enough
radiation, they pull it back out. They say it’s ‘cooked.’”

“You mean it’s hot?” Teena asked.

“It’s hot,” Eddie said, “but not like if it came out of a stove. By hot,
they mean it’s radioactive. If you touched it, or even got near it, you
would get burned, but you probably wouldn’t even know it for a while. It
would be a radiation burn. That’s a kind of burn you don’t feel, but it
destroys your blood cells and tissues, and—well, you’ve had it.”

“So that’s what a radioisotope is,” Mrs. Ross said. “It’s like a sponge.
Only instead of soaking up water, it soaks up radiation.”

“That’s about it,” Eddie said. “My dad says that as more is learned
about the ways to use isotopes, the whole world is going to be improved.
You’ve heard of radiocobalt for curing cancer. Well, that’s an isotope.
They make it by cooking cobalt in an atomic reactor. Oh, there are
hundreds of different isotopes. Like I said, isotopes can be made of
most of the elements. And there are over a hundred elements. Some soak
up a lot of radioactivity, and are strong and dangerous. Others absorb
only a little and are pretty safe to use. Depends, too, on how long they
let them cook in the reactor.”

“What kind was the one stolen from the college today?” Teena asked.

“Dad didn’t say exactly,” Eddie answered, “except he did say that if
whoever took it didn’t know what he was doing and opened up the lead
capsule, it could kill him. Of course, even the mild isotopes are deadly
if they’re not handled right.”

“My goodness, it is a serious matter, isn’t it?” Mrs. Ross said.

Eddie nodded. It was even more serious than its threat of danger to
anyone who handled it carelessly. It was a new isotope—a secret isotope.
His father hadn’t said whether it had been developed for curing things
or for destroying things. But many radioisotopes could do either; it
depended on how they were used. Eddie assumed that anyone who would
stoop to stealing isotopes more than likely would be interested in their
ability to destroy rather than their ability to benefit mankind.

“Well, I certainly do hope everything works out all right,” Teena’s
mother said.

“So do I,” Teena agreed.

Eddie glanced at the kitchen clock. “Oh, boy,” he said, “I’d better be
heading back home. I didn’t mean to come over here and talk so long.”

“Oh, we’re glad you did, Eddie,” Mrs. Ross said. “I’m afraid too few of
us know anything about this atom business.”

“That’s right, Mrs. Ross,” Eddie agreed. “People should talk more and
read more about it. After all, this is an atomic age. We might as well
face it. My father says that in horse-and-buggy days everyone knew how
to feed a horse and grease a wagon wheel. They knew what was needed to
get the work done. But now that atoms are being harnessed to do the
work, not many people even bother to find out what an atom is.”

Mrs. Ross smiled. “I guess you’re right, Eddie,” she said, “but I
wouldn’t quite know how to go about feeding an atom.”

“Or greasing one,” Teena added.

Eddie laughed. “I sure wouldn’t want the job of trying to feed a herd of
them the size of a period,” he said. “Did you know that there are about
three million billion atoms of carbon in a single period printed at the
end of a sentence. That’s how small atoms are.”

“Three million billion is a lot of something,” a man’s voice spoke
behind him. “What are we talking about, Eddie?”

“Oh, hello, Mr. Ross,” Eddie said, turning around and standing up. “I
didn’t hear you come in.”

Teena’s father was a medium-sized man with light-brown hair which was
getting somewhat thin on top. He was usually quite cheerful and full of
fun, but tonight his face seemed unusually drawn and sober. He stepped
to the table, leaned over, and gave both Teena and Mrs. Ross a kiss on
the cheek.

“Eddie was telling us about atoms,” Teena’s mother said. “Did you know
there were three million billion of them in a period?”

“How many in a comma?” Mr. Ross said to Eddie, then added quickly,
“forget it, Eddie. It wasn’t very funny. I—I’m afraid I don’t feel very
funny tonight.”

“Sit down, dear,” Mrs. Ross said. “I’ll warm your dinner. You didn’t
sound very cheerful when you called to say you would be late. How did
everything go at the plant today?”

“Not so good,” Teena’s father said tiredly. “In fact, not good at all.”

Problems. It seemed that everyone had problems, Eddie thought, as he
started to leave.




                             CHAPTER THREE


Three days later Eddie learned the nature of the trouble at Acme
Aircraft Company. It was midmorning Saturday. Carrying a picnic lunch,
he and Teena were hiking along the beach toward the distant U.S. Coast
Guard lighthouse which stood on a high point overlooking Moon Bay. Old
Captain Daniels, the lightkeeper, had been a friend of theirs for nearly
two years. Every once in a while Teena and Eddie went to visit “Cap,” as
they fondly called him. Teena would put up a picnic lunch which they
shared with the kindly old man whose lonely vigil over the light had
warned ships off the rocky coast for a good many years.

Eddie wasn’t sure exactly how the conversation got around to Acme
Aircraft Company. It seemed that Teena mentioned something about
trouble. Eddie asked, “What trouble?”

“Didn’t you read the paper this morning?” Teena asked.

“We don’t take the morning paper,” Eddie said. “We take the _Globe_.”

“The aircraft company has been keeping it quiet,” Teena said, “but
somehow the news leaked out. It was all in this morning’s paper.”

Actually, Eddie doubted that he would have noticed it, even if they had
taken the morning paper. The big thing around his house was the
disappearance of the radioisotope. No promising clues had been found.
The theft of the isotope remained as much a mystery as it had been from
the first day. The few times he had seen his father, he had noticed how
much deeper the lines of worry on his face had become. Eddie had avoided
asking questions, yet he couldn’t help wondering if his father was in
danger of losing his job at the college. Some of the things his mother
had said seemed to hint at the possibility.

The newspapers had taken a dim view of the robbery. They protested
against the carelessness which would enable the theft, in broad
daylight, of such a valuable, secret, and hazardous thing as a
radioactive isotope.

The blame, of course, fell primarily upon Mr. Taylor’s shoulders.

“Eddie,” Teena said, “you’re not even listening to me.”

“I—I’m sorry,” Eddie answered. “What did you say?”

“I merely said that some important blueprints are missing from my
father’s department at Acme Aircraft,” Teena explained.

“Maybe someone put them in the wrong drawer or something,” Eddie
suggested.

“They’ve looked everywhere, Eddie,” Teena said. “That’s why my father’s
been getting home late every day. They’ve searched absolutely
everywhere.”

“Well, I guess they can always make new blueprints,” Eddie said. He
really couldn’t see why it was so important, especially not if you
compared it to stolen radioisotopes.

“That’s not the point,” Teena said sharply. “They were top-secret
blueprints—something to do with guiding a new missile Acme Aircraft is
getting ready to make. If the plans were stolen—well, you know what that
could mean.”

The importance of what Teena was saying struck Eddie suddenly. Could
there be any connection between the missing blueprints and the stolen
isotope?

The idea sent a chill along Eddie’s spine. Perhaps there was a whole spy
ring operating around Oceanview!

He mentioned it to Teena.

“I thought the same thing,” she said. “But, Eddie, we’re not at war or
anything. It’s silly to think there are spies and things like that
running around. That’s comic-book stuff.”

“Not to me, it isn’t,” Eddie said. “There’s plenty of spying going on,
war or no war. Every once in a while you hear about it.”

“Aw, you’re just trying to scare me,” Teena said. She stopped and picked
up a shell, looked it over, then skipped it into the surf. Sandy chased
it, yipping happily, but turned and scurried back just ahead of the
foaming surf.

Eddie smiled. “Maybe I am,” he said. “Maybe I’m scaring myself, too.
Anyway, if we’re going to hike all the way to the lighthouse, we’ll have
to hurry up.”

As they walked on up the coast, the sandy beach gave way to rock
formations which jutted out into the ocean. They picked their way
carefully over the rocks. Now and then they stopped to inspect some tide
pool for small crabs and other sea life left by the receding water.
Sandy was beside himself with joy as he chased small crabs into rock
crevices.

Teena found a starfish which she dropped into a small cloth sack she had
brought along. Eddie had never been very interested in gathering shells
and other sea souvenirs, but Teena had quite a collection at home.

They crossed over the rocks and dropped down into a sandy cove.

“There’s someone with a boat,” Teena said, pointing along the curving
beach. A rowboat was pulled up on the sand. Two men stood beside it.

“Fishermen,” Eddie said. “Let’s see if they caught anything.”

There were several other small boats out on Moon Bay. Eddie and his
father had fished the bay several times themselves. Although shallow in
places, there were spots in the bay where good-sized perch and bass, and
occasional halibut were caught.

Eddie and Teena hurried along the beach. The two men looked up as they
approached.

“Hi, there,” Eddie greeted. “Any luck?”

The two men glanced at each other, seeming to pass a silent question
back and forth.

Eddie laughed. “It’s O.K.,” he said. “I know most of the fishing spots
out there. You won’t be giving away any secrets.”

[Illustration: _“Hi, there,” Eddie greeted. “Any luck?”_]

“Secrets?” one of the men said. He was tall and thin. His cheekbones
pushed sharply outward against the sides of his face. His skin was
strangely white for that of a fisherman in midsummer. Most week-end
fishermen around Oceanview had pretty good tans by this time. Both men
wore faded blue denims, white sneakers, and bright-colored sports
shirts. The fact that their clothes looked new made Eddie think it might
be the first time they had fished Moon Bay. The orange-and-white rowboat
pulled up on the sand had been rented from Anderson’s Landing. Both
Eddie and Teena knew Mr. Anderson well.

“We know fishermen don’t like to give away their fishing secrets,” Teena
said, “so if you caught any, you don’t need to tell us where you got
them.”

The other man smiled then. He looked relieved, Eddie thought. In
appearance, he was almost the opposite of his companion. He was short
and squat, almost fat. Despite the slight cool breeze from the ocean,
the warm sun made his chubby face glisten with sweat. He seemed a little
more willing to smile than the tall man. Eddie didn’t feel uncomfortable
under his gaze, as he did under the stare of the tall man.

“To tell you the truth,” the short man said, “we haven’t been fishing
yet. So I guess you couldn’t say we’ve had any luck.”

“Oh, I see,” Eddie said thoughtfully. Sandy began sniffing around the
rowboat.

“Get that mutt away from there,” the tall man said.

“He won’t hurt anything, mister,” Eddie assured him.

He went over, though, and took hold of Sandy’s collar. As he did so he
glanced into the beached rowboat. There were no fish, or even signs of
fish. There were a couple bamboo poles which Eddie recognized also as
having been rented from Anderson’s Landing. There was a box, probably
the men’s lunch.

And under the plank seat stretching across the beam Eddie saw a round
metal cylinder. At first he thought it was the kind of tube used as a
carrying case to hold the sections of a jointed trout rod, but as he got
a better look, it didn’t seem long enough for that.

Besides, who would use a light trout rod for ocean fishing? It wouldn’t
be any good to catch the big bass which were sometimes caught in the
bay. It’d probably snap in two if you tried to horse a halibut in with
it.

“What are you looking at, kid?” The tall man’s harsh voice jerked Eddie
out of his thoughts.

“N-nothin’,” Eddie said.

“Then stay away from the boat.”

“Take it easy, Simms,” the short man said. “These kids don’t mean any
harm. They—they’re not trying to steal our fishing secrets. Now, are
you?” He smiled at Teena, displaying a mouthful of yellowish uneven
teeth.

Looking at those teeth made Eddie mighty glad his teeth would never look
like that. What little bother his braces and the cleaning were would
sure be worth it in the long run. He never wanted yellow, uneven teeth
like that man had.

“I should say we wouldn’t try to steal any fishing secrets,” Teena
answered the fat man’s question. “You’re welcome to all the fish you can
catch.”

“We don’t care how you catch them, or what with,” Eddie added, “long as
it’s legal.”

“Anyway, we’re on our way to visit Captain Daniels at the lighthouse,”
Teena said. “Come on, Eddie.”

“Don’t go away mad,” the heavy-set man said. “We didn’t mean any harm.”

“Let ’em go, Roy,” Simms said. “We’ve got work to do.”

Eddie motioned to Teena and called Sandy. He had intended to tell the
men of a good fishing spot only a few hundred yards out from the cove,
but the way the men acted made him change his mind.

At the far end of the cove, Eddie and Teena stopped and turned to watch
the two men as they shoved the rowboat into the calm surf and climbed in
clumsily over the side.

“Boy, I’m glad all fishermen aren’t like that,” Teena said. “That tall
man sure acted mean. I hope they don’t catch any fish.”

“I don’t think they will,” Eddie said. “I saw their bait can. Know what
they’re using?”

“Sand crabs?”

“No. That’s what they should be using. They had some old dried up
mussels. The fish here in Moon Bay don’t bite on mussel. Dad and I have
tried it.”

“Then I wonder why Mr. Anderson sold it to them,” Teena said. “Mr.
Anderson usually helps the fishermen. It’s good for his boat-rental
business to sell the right bait.”

“I’ll bet they didn’t even ask what kind of bait was best,” Eddie said.
“They probably grabbed the first thing they came to. And Mr. Anderson
always has a few mussels in his bait bins.”

“I didn’t think fishing was so good in the middle of the day,” Teena
said. She pointed out across the water. “See, most of the boats have
gone ashore.”

“That’s right,” Eddie said. “If those guys wanted to catch fish they
should have been out there early this morning when the big ones were
biting.”

“Guess they don’t know much about fishing, huh, Eddie?” Teena said,
smiling.

“That’s what I figure,” Eddie agreed. “Besides, they didn’t even act
like fishermen. That tall fellow really was a grouch. First time I ever
ran across a grouchy fisherman.”

“Anyway, let’s quit worrying about them,” Teena suggested. “It’s almost
noon. We want to reach the lighthouse before Cap has lunch. He can’t
very well eat his lunch and ours, too.”

“O.K.,” Eddie agreed, taking one last glance at the two men rowing out
on the blue water of the bay. “But something smells fishy about those
two—and I don’t mean the kind you catch on a hook!”




                              CHAPTER FOUR


The lighthouse was a tall concrete finger, painted dazzling white with
broad red rings around it. It stood on the top of a rock palisade which
rose steeply from the beach. Steel stairs spiraled upward on the
outside, leading to the strong glass-enclosed electric eye at the top.

Eddie and Teena paused on the beach below and looked up. Crude steps
hewn out of the rocks led up to the lighthouse.

“I’ll carry the lunch,” Eddie volunteered. “And be careful. The sea
spray can make those steps slippery.”

They took their time getting to the top. Sandy went ahead, sniffing in
every crevice on the way.

“Phew!” Teena gasped as they reached the base of the lighthouse. “There
seem to be more steps every time we climb it.”

Eddie smiled and shifted the lunch sack to his other hand. “You’re
getting old, Teena,” he teased.

“Welcome aboard, mates,” a deep, kindly voice spoke from nearby.

They turned and saw Captain Daniels standing outside the door of his
living quarters, a tiny three-room cottage located about fifty feet from
the base of the lighthouse.

“Oh, hello, Captain Daniels,” Teena called. “Sure glad you’re home.”

“Home?” the former sea captain said, smiling. “A lightkeeper is always
home.”

In Eddie’s opinion, Captain Daniels looked exactly like an old ship’s
captain or a lightkeeper should look. He wore a fringe of white beard
which formed a half-circle, starting under one ear and curving across
his chin and up the other side. His bushy white hair fairly exploded
from beneath the battered dark-blue seaman’s cap which he wore even
while eating. Eddie sometimes wondered if Captain Daniels wore the cap
to bed.

The old mariner also had sharp blue eyes. Eddie pictured all stout
seamen as having sharp blue eyes.

“We brought a little lunch with us, Captain Daniels,” Teena said. “Hope
you haven’t eaten already.”

A twinkle came into Cap’s eyes. “I might have,” he said, “but I reckon I
better confess that I saw you through my telescope coming up the beach.
Thought I’d better hold off on lunch—just in case.”

“Can we eat outside?” Teena asked.

“The lawn’s nice and dry,” Cap said.

“Let’s make it a picnic,” Eddie suggested.

“Good idea, mate,” the retired seafarer said.

Captain Daniels took great pride in his small patch of grass. It seemed
to grow right out of the rock on which the lighthouse stood. However,
Captain Daniels had hauled in topsoil from miles away and spread it
carefully to make the lawn. He tended it, and the flower beds which
bordered it, with an affection that seemed strangely out of place for a
swashbuckling ship’s captain who had roamed the seven seas.

The three of them sat down on the lawn. Teena passed around the
sandwiches, opened the potato chips, and unwrapped the pickles and
olives.

They ate for a while in silence, looking off across the blue water of
the bay toward the open ocean beyond. Eddie’s gaze followed the curving
shore line to the north. Land’s end in that direction was Cedar Point,
which stuck its rocky finger out into the ocean. It was wildly rugged
country, difficult to get to except by boat across the bay. Eddie
supposed that was why the lighthouse had been built on the smaller point
located on the more civilized curve of the bay. Yet the lighthouse was
high and plainly visible to ships at sea.

Captain Daniels finished his lunch, dug a pipe from his pocket, and
tamped tobacco into the bowl. “Mighty good,” he said. “Sure nice of you
young folks to share your rations with me.”

“Oh, we like to do it, Captain Daniels,” Teena said. “It’s so much fun
coming up here to visit you.”

“From what I’ve been reading in the papers,” the lightkeeper said, “I
hardly expected to see you for a while.”

“You mean the stolen isotope?” Eddie asked.

“I don’t know much about isotopes,” Cap said, “but I do know that the
newspapers have been making your father walk the plank for letting it be
stolen.”

“It really wasn’t his fault,” Eddie defended.

“Of course not,” Captain Daniels agreed. “But someone always gets
blamed. Just like those missing blueprints I read about in this
morning’s paper. Teena’s father probably has nothing to do with guarding
them, but when they turn up missing, he’s the one who gets lashed to the
mast. The captain of a ship takes the blame for everything that happens
aboard. Actually, that’s the way it should be, I suppose.”

Eddie had to agree, but he didn’t like to think about the worry his
father and Mr. Ross were going through. He had been trying not to think
about it.

Captain Daniels seemed to sense this. He quickly changed the subject.

“Don’t seem to be many fishermen out today,” he said, looking off across
the bay. “And there’s one boat out there that could just as well have
stayed ashore. Won’t catch anything worth frying out there on top of the
sand bar.”

The rowboat had been anchored over the light-blue strip of water which
marked the familiar sand bar stretching nearly a half mile across the
middle of the bay. The sand bar lay about ten feet beneath the surface
of the water. It was marked by three buoys, one at each end and one in
the middle. Deep-draft boats avoided the sand bar. Fishermen kept away
from it, as the larger fish lay in deeper water.

“Isn’t that the boat with those two men, Eddie?” Teena asked.

“I think so,” Eddie said, squinting through the sunlight.

“What two men?” Cap asked.

Quickly Eddie told him about the two strangers he and Teena had come
across at the cove. Captain Daniels reached into his pocket and brought
out a small telescope. He pulled its sections out to full length and
handed it to Eddie. “See for yourself,” he invited.

Eddie adjusted the lens to his vision. With the telescope it was easy to
see that the two men in the rowboat were the tall one called Simms and
the chunky one called Roy.

“Anyway,” Eddie said, “they don’t seem to be pulling in any fish.” He
passed the telescope to Teena.

“It doesn’t look like they’re even trying,” Teena said. “There’s only
one line in.”

“Maybe they’re just relaxing,” Captain Daniels said. “Some people don’t
care whether they catch any fish or not. They rent a boat, row it out
and anchor it, and then sit around soothing their nerves. People build
up a lot of tensions these days, you know. Folks have different ways of
getting rid of them.”

“They were nervous, all right,” Teena said. “Especially the tall one.”
She handed the telescope back to Captain Daniels.

“Well, let’s forget about them,” Eddie suggested. “Captain Daniels,
would you like us to help polish the light again today?”

“You know you’re always welcome to help with that,” the lightkeeper
said, “but I don’t want you coming up here thinking I 