[Illustration: GORILLA HUNTING.
                     CHAP. XXXII.]




                                STORIES
                                OF THE
                            GORILLA COUNTRY


                       NARRATED FOR YOUNG PEOPLE


                                  BY
                            PAUL DU CHAILLU

             AUTHOR OF "DISCOVERIES IN EQUATORIAL AFRICA"
                              ETC., ETC.


                        NEW AND CHEAPER EDITION


                                LONDON
                    SAMPSON LOW, MARSTON & COMPANY
                               _Limited_
                          St. Dunstan's House
                    FETTER LANE, FLEET STREET, E.C.
                                 1893
                        [_All rights reserved_]




                                LONDON:
                PRINTED BY GILBERT AND RIVINGTON, LD.,
               ST. JOHN'S HOUSE, CLERKENWELL ROAD, E.C.




                               CONTENTS.


      PAGE

  PRELIMINARY CHAPTER                                                  1

                              CHAPTER II.
  Arrival on the coast--A king and his palace--Dancing and
  idol-worship                                                         3

                             CHAPTER III.
  A week in the woods--A tornado--The leopards prowling about--I
  kill a cobra and a scorpion--Fight with a buffalo--Hunting for
  wild boars--A leopard takes a ride on a bull--Sick with the
  fever                                                               13

                              CHAPTER IV.
  A village on the seashore--Lying in wait for a leopard              23

                              CHAPTER V.
  The Bay of Corisco--The mangrove trees--The wonderful flocks of
  birds--What I found in the pouch of a pelican--How an old king
  is buried, and the new king crowned                                 29

                              CHAPTER VI.
  An old man killed for witchcraft--My journey to the country of
  the cannibals--Starting on the route                                37

                             CHAPTER VII.
  Our journey through the wilderness continued--A rebellion in
  camp--Nothing to eat--I shoot a fish and miss an elephant--I
  kill a big snake and the others eat him--My first sight of
  gorillas                                                            47

                             CHAPTER VIII.
  I arrive among the cannibals--Their spears, bows, and
  battle-axes--They take me for a spirit--Their king shakes when
  he sees me--I give him a looking-glass--It astonishes him           59

                              CHAPTER IX.
  An elephant hunt                                                    67

                              CHAPTER X.
  Life among the cannibals--Curious musical instruments--Cooking
  utensils--A blacksmith's bellows and anvil--Cannibal diet           75

                              CHAPTER XI.
  Journey to Yoongoolapay--Hunting with nets--The terrible
  Bashikonay ants                                                     83

                             CHAPTER XII.
  Returning to the coast--Caverns and waterfalls in the
  highlands--Crossing a river on mangrove roots--Stirring up a big
  snake--A mutual scare                                               89

                             CHAPTER XIII.
  Cape Lopez and an open prairie once more--King Bango and his
  three hundred wives--His five idols--Slave barracoons--The
  corpse and the vultures                                             97

                             CHAPTER XIV.
  Slave barracoons--A big snake under my bed--A slave-ship off the
  coast                                                              103

                              CHAPTER XV.
  Going into the interior--Sleeping with the king's rats--The
  chimpanzee--Kill a gazelle--Too cold to sleep--The grey
  partridge                                                          109

                             CHAPTER XVI.
  The hippopotamus--A speck of war--Reach Ngola--A Sunday
  talk--The black man's God and the white man's God--How King
  Njambai punished his wife--We build an olako in the woods          117

                             CHAPTER XVII.
  An unsuccessful hunt for elephants--I take aim at a buffalo--A
  leopard in the grass near us--We shoot the leopard and her
  kitten--Great rejoicing in camp--Who shall have the tail?--A
  quarrel over the brains--The guinea hens--The monkeys              125

                            CHAPTER XVIII.
  Alone in camp--Hunting for elephants--Aboko kills a rogue--I cut
  another python in two--We shoot some wild boars--A buffalo
  hunt--Return to Sangatanga--King Bango sick                        133

                             CHAPTER XIX.
  A jolly excursion party--A race for the fishing banks--The
  Oroungou burial-ground                                             143

                              CHAPTER XX.
  Our camp at Point Fetish--An African watering-place--Fishing,
  but not bathing--The sharks--Curing mullets, etc.--Turning
  turtles--Bird shooting--A leopard springs upon us                  149

                             CHAPTER XXI.
  Bound for the interior--A sea voyage--A tornado--We reach the
  Fernand-Vaz--Sangala wishes to detain me--A night
  alarm--Prospect of a war--Arrayed for battle--A compromise--My
  Commi friends                                                      157

                             CHAPTER XXII.
  I build a village, and call it Washington--I start for the
  interior--My speech on leaving--The people applaud me
  vociferously, and promise to be honest--We reach Aniambia--The
  "big king," Olenga-Yombi--A royal ball in my honour--The
  superstitions of the natives--A man tossed by a buffalo            169

                            CHAPTER XXIII.
  Capture of a young gorilla--I call him "Fighting Joe"--His
  strength and bad temper--He proves untameable--Joe
  escapes--Recaptured--Escapes again--Unpleasant to handle--Death
  of "Fighting Joe"                                                  179

                             CHAPTER XXIV.
  The hippopotamus--A duel--Shooting on the river--Nearly
  upset--A night-hunt on land--My companion fires and
  runs--Appearance and habits of the hippopotamus                    189

                             CHAPTER XXV.
  Visit of King Quengueza--I promise to visit him--The kindness of
  the Commi--The dry season of the Fernand-Vaz--Plenty of birds
  and fishes--The marabouts--The eagles--A bad wound                 199

                             CHAPTER XXVI.
  Another expedition to Lake Anengue--Difficult passage up the
  river--The crocodiles--King Damagondai and his troubles--I
  buy an mbuiti, or idol                                             207

                            CHAPTER XXVII.
  A visit to King Shimbouvenegani--His royal costume--Hunting
  crocodiles--How they seize their prey--The nkago--The ogata        215

                            CHAPTER XXVIII.
  The nshiego mbouvé--Bald-headed apes--Their houses in the
  trees--Lying in wait for them--We kill a male--The shrieks of
  his mate--Description of the animal--Farewell to Shimbouvenegani   221

                             CHAPTER XXIX.
  War threatened--Oshoria arms his men--We bluff them off, and
  fall sick with fever--The _mbola ivoga_, or end of mourning
  time--A death and burial--Finding out the sorcerer--The village
  deserted--I become Viceroy at Washington                           227

                             CHAPTER XXX.
  Hunting in the woods--The mboyo wolf--We catch another young
  gorilla--He starves to death                                       237

                             CHAPTER XXXI.
  Going to unknown regions--Quengueza sends his son as a
  hostage--I take him along with me--Reception by the king--Our
  speeches--Quengueza afraid of a witch--An incantation scene        241

                            CHAPTER XXXII.
  Gorilla hunting--My companions, Mombon, Etia, and Gambo--Etia
  kills a large gorilla---We make up a large party--Camp stories
  about gorillas--We capture a young gorilla--Her untimely death     247

                            CHAPTER XXXIII.
  Voyage up the river--We build a village near
  Obindji--Quengueza's plan for keeping the Sabbath--Kindness of
  the natives--A trial by ordeal                                     253

                            CHAPTER XXXIV.
  The kooloo-kamba--The gouamba, or meat-hunger--Exploring the
  forest--Gorilla hunting--Within eight yards of a large
  gorilla--He roars with rage and marches upon us                    259

                             CHAPTER XXXV.
  We go up the river to N'calai Boumba--A severe attack of
  fever--The tender care of the natives for me--Anguilai accuses
  his people of bewitching me--I go out and quiet him--A boy cut
  to pieces for witchcraft--A useful idol--The ebony trees           265

                            CHAPTER XXXVI.
  Hunting for food--We kill a female nshiego mbouvé--A young
  nshiego with a white face--He becomes my pet Tommy--His
  affection for me--His stealing pranks--Tommy gets drunk--His
  behaviour at meals--His sudden death--Conclusion                   271




                LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.


  GORILLA HUNTING                       FRONTISPIECE

  MY RECEPTION BY THE KING                         3

  ENTICING THE LEOPARD                            23

  FLOCKS OF BIRDS                                 29

  SCENE WITH THE MBOUSHA                          37

  KILLING THE SNAKE                               47

  KING ASTONISHED AT LOOKING-GLASS                59

  ENTRAPPING THE ELEPHANT                         67

  FAN BLACKSMITHS AT WORK                         75

  THE HANDJA                                      78

  NET-HUNTING                                     83

  MANGROVE SWAMP. TUMBLING AND FALLING            89

  SLAVE BARRACOONS. BURIAL GROUND                 97

  EMBARKING SLAVES                               103

  THE GAZELLE                                    109

  AFTER DINNER                                   117

  A LEOPARD AND HER YOUNG ONE                    125

  ABOKO KILLS A ROGUE ELEPHANT                   133

  FISHING                                        143

  TURNING TURTLES JUST BEFORE SUNRISE            149

  OUR SCHOONER CAUGHT IN A TORNADO               157

  AFRICAN BALL. KING OLENGA-YOMBI DANCING        169

  CAPTURING A YOUNG GORILLA                      179

  HIPPOPOTAMI AT HOME                            189

  MARABOUTS, STORKS, AND PELICANS                199

  THE KING RECEIVES ME                           207

  A CROCODILE HUNT                               215

  THE NSHIEGO MBOUVÉ                             221

  EXPIRATION OF MOURNING                         227

  WOLF HUNTING                                   237

  AN INCANTATION SCENE                           241

  A TRIAL BY ORDEAL                              253

  THE GORILLA MARCHES UPON US                    259

  MEETING THE MBUITI                             265

  A YOUNG NSHIEGO MBOUVÉ WITH A WHITE FACE       272

[Illustration]




[Illustration]

Stories of the Gorilla Country.




PRELIMINARY CHAPTER.


I had passed several years on the African Coast before I began the
explorations recorded in my first book. In those years I hunted, traded
with the natives, and made collections in natural history.

In such a wild country as Africa one does not go far without
adventures. The traveller necessarily sees what is strange and
wonderful, for everything is strange.

In this book I have attempted to relate some of the incidents of life
in Africa for the reading of young folks. In doing this I have kept no
chronological order, but have selected incidents and adventures here
and there as they seem to be fitted for my purpose.

I have noticed that most intelligent boys like to read about the habits
of wild animals, and the manners and way of life of savage men; and
of such matters this book is composed. In it I have entered into more
minute details concerning the life of the native inhabitants than I
could in my other books, and have shown how the people build their
houses, what are their amusements, how they hunt, fish, eat, travel,
and live.

Whenever I am at a friend's house the children ask me to tell them
something about Africa. I like children, and in this book have written
especially for them. I hope to interest many who are yet too young to
read my larger works.

[Illustration]




[Illustration: MY RECEPTION BEFORE THE KING.]




CHAPTER II.

  ARRIVAL ON THE COAST--A KING AND HIS PALACE--DANCING AND
  IDOL-WORSHIP.


Some years ago a three-masted vessel took me to a wild country on the
West Coast of Africa near the Equator.

It was a very wild country indeed.

As we came in sight of the land, which was covered with forest, canoes
began to start from the shore towards us; and, as we neared the land,
we could see the people crowding down on the beach to look at the
strange sight of a vessel.

The canoes approached the vessel in great numbers. Some of them were
so small that they looked like mere nutshells. Indeed, some of the men
paddled with their feet; and one man carried his canoe ashore on his
shoulder.

At last, the natives came on board, and what funny people they were! I
could not discern one from another; they seemed to me all alike.

What a queer way of dressing they had too! You would have laughed to
see them. Some had only an old coat on. Others had an old pair of
trousers which probably had belonged to some sailor; these wore no
shirt or coat. Some had only an old ragged shirt, and some again had
nothing on except an old hat. Of course none of them had shoes.

How they shouted and hallooed as they came about the vessel! They
seemed to speak such a strange language. No one on board appeared to
understand them. They made so great a noise that I thought I should
become deaf.

One of them had a fowl to sell; another brought an egg or two; and
another a few bunches of plantains.

Our captain knew the coast; for he had long been an African trader,
though he had never been at this place before.

The ship cast anchor. It was not far from a river called Benito.

I left the vessel and went ashore with some others. As I landed I was
surrounded immediately by crowds of natives, who looked so wild and so
savage that I thought they would kill me at once.

I was led to the village, which stood not far from the sea, and was
hidden from view by the very large trees and the great forest that
surrounded it. On one side of the village was a prairie.

I shall always remember this village. It was the first African village
I had ever seen; and it was unlike those built in Southern Africa.

Don't think for a moment that I am going to speak to you of stone or
wooden houses. No! These wild people lived in queer little huts, the
walls of which were made of the bark of trees, and were not more than
four or five feet high. The top of the roof was only about seven or
eight feet from the ground. The length of these huts was about ten or
twelve feet, and they were seven or eight feet wide. There were no
windows, and the door was very small. They immediately took me to one
of these houses, and said they gave it to me. They meant that it was
mine as long as I would stay with them. It belonged to the son of the
king.

So I went in. But where was I to sit down?

There was no chair to be seen.

Patience, thought I. These people had probably never seen a chair in
their lives. It was so dark I could not see at first. By and by I saw
how the hut was furnished. There were some calabashes to hold water,
and two or three cooking pots. There were some ugly-looking spears, an
axe, and two or three large and queer-looking knives, which could sever
the head of a man at one blow. Of course I looked for a bed: I need not
tell you there was none; but, instead, there were some sticks to lie
upon. The very look of this sleeping-place made me shudder; I thought
of snakes, scorpions, and centipedes. The dark hut seemed the very
place for them. Shortly after the king's son came. If I remember well,
his name was _Andèké_. He told me that his father, the king, was ready
to receive me.

The king ready to receive me!

This was a great announcement. I must dress.

But how?

There was no washing-basin to wash myself in; besides, I had forgotten
my soap.

I was glad I had no beard at that time; for I do not know how I could
have shaved.

In short, I resolved to go and see his majesty as I was.

The sun being very warm, I took my umbrella with me. The people
conducted me to the royal palace.

What do you suppose a palace to be in the Benito country? The king's
palace was made of the same material (bark of trees) as the houses I
have just described to you; and it was only about twice as big.

As I entered I went towards the king, who was seated on a stool.
Another empty stool was by his side.

I may say that Apourou--such was the king's name--did not come up to my
ideas of a king. In fact, I should have laughed at him had I dared.

His costume was composed of a red soldier's coat, and he wore a little
bit of calico round his waist. That was all. You must understand he had
no shirt.

He was a tall, slim negro, with grey hair, and had large scars on
his face, and his whole body was covered with tattoos. He wore large
earrings. He was smoking a big ugly pipe.

He looked at me, and I looked at him.

The room was full of people, and the king had several of his wives
around him. The queen was there. Would you believe it? in that country
a man marries as many wives as he chooses!

The king looked at me for a long time without saying a word. Finally
he opened his mouth, clapped his hands, and said I was a funny-looking
_fellow_.

He next said he was very glad to see me, and would take care of me.
Then he touched my hair, and said I must give him some. He would like
to have me remain with him always. At this the people shouted, "We want
the _ntangani_ to stay with us!"

       *       *       *       *       *

What do you think he did next?

He quietly proposed to me that I should get married to some of his
countrywomen; and added that whomsoever I should choose would become my
wife.

The suggestion was received by all the people with a tremendous grunt
of approval, to show that they thought just as their king. Then they
shouted, "The girl he likes he shall marry!"

I said, "I don't want to get married, I am too young." I did not want
to tell him that I would not, for all the world, marry one of his
people.

It was getting very warm in the hut, and there was a strong odour.
The people were packed so closely together that they reminded one of
herrings in a barrel, and you must remember I said the house had no
windows.

Then the king presented me with one fowl, two eggs, and one bunch of
plantain; and as I went away he said I had better give him my umbrella.
But I went off as if I had not heard what he said. I thought it was
rather too much for a king to ask a stranger to give up his umbrella. I
had just begun to learn what African kings were.

The people followed me everywhere; I wish I could have understood their
language. One man could talk English, and I am going now to give you a
specimen of his English.

When he thought I must be hungry, he said, "Want chop? Want chop?" When
he saw that I could not understand what he meant, he made signs with
his hands and mouth, which at once explained to me that he had asked
me if I wanted to eat. I said, "Yes;" and after a while, some cooked
plantains, with some fish, were brought to me. I did not care for the
plantains; it was the first time I had ever tasted them.

After my meal, I walked through the street of the village and came to
a house, in the recess of which I saw an enormous idol. I had never in
all my life seen such an ugly thing. It was a rude representation of
some human being, of the size of life, and was made of wood. It had
large copper eyes, and a tongue of iron, which shot out from its mouth
to show that it could sting. The lips were painted red. It wore large
iron earrings. Its head was ornamented with a feather cap. Most of the
feathers were red, and came from the tails of grey parrots, while the
body and face were painted red, white, and yellow. It was dressed in
the skins of wild animals. Around it were scattered skins of tigers
and serpents, and the bones and skulls of animals. Some food also was
placed near, so that it might eat if it chose.

It was now sunset; and night soon set in over the village. For the
first time in my life I stood alone in this dark world, surrounded by
savages, without any white people near me. There was no light in the
street, and only the reflection of the fires could be seen now and
then. How dismal it was!

I looked at my pistols and my guns, and was glad to find that they were
in good order.

By-and-by the people began to come out of their huts; and I saw some
torches lighted, and taken towards the large _mbuiti_ as they call
the idol, and there placed on the ground. The large drums or tom-toms
were also carried there; and the women and men of the village gathered
around. The tom-toms beat; and, soon after, I heard the people singing.
I went to see what was the matter.

What a sight met my eyes!

The men had their bodies painted in different colours. Some had one
cheek red and the other white or yellow. A broad white or yellow stripe
was painted across the middle of the chest and along both the arms.
Others had their bodies spotted. Most ugly they looked! The women wore
several iron or brass rings around their wrists and ankles.

Then the singing began, and the dancing! I had never seen such dancing
before. It was very ungraceful. The drummers beat on the tom-toms with
all their might. As they became warm with exertion their bodies shone
like seals, so oily were they.

I looked and looked, with my eyes wide open; I was nearly stunned with
the noise. As the women danced and sung, the brass and iron rings which
they wore struck against each other, and kept time with the music and
the beating of the tom-toms.

But why were they all there dancing and screeching around the idol?

I will tell you.

They were about to start on a hunting expedition, and they were asking
the idol to give them good luck in their sport.

When I found it was to be a hunting expedition, I wanted to go at once
with these savages, though I was only a lad under twenty years old.

I retired to my hut with a valiant heart; I was going to do great
things.

If you had been in my place, boys, would you not have felt the same?
Would you have left the gorillas alone? I am sure you all shout at
once, "No! no!" Would you have let the elephants go unmolested in the
forest? "Certainly not," will be your answer.

And what about the chimpanzee, and the big leopards who carry away
so many people and eat them, the huge buffaloes, the wild boars, the
antelopes, and the gazelles?

Would you have left the snakes alone?

Perhaps you are all going to say "Yes" to that; and I think you are
right, for many of these snakes are very poisonous, and they are
numerous in these great forests; for the country I am telling you
about is nothing but an immense jungle. When a man is bitten by one of
these snakes he often dies in a few minutes. There is also to be found
in these woods an immense python, or boa, that swallows antelopes,
gazelles, and many other animals. I shall have a good deal to tell you
about them by-and-by.

So I resolved that I would try to see all these native tribes; that I
would have a peep at the cannibals; that I would have a good look also
at the dwarfs.

I am sure, that if any one of you had been with me on that coast, you
would have said to me, "Du Chaillu, let us go together and see all
these things, and then come back home and tell the good folks all we
have seen."

Yes, I am certain that every one of you would have felt as I did.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]

CHAPTER III.

  A WEEK IN THE WOODS--A TORNADO--THE LEOPARDS PROWLING ABOUT--I KILL
  A COBRA AND A SCORPION--FIGHT WITH A BUFFALO--HUNTING FOR WILD
  BOARS--A LEOPARD TAKES A RIDE ON A BULL--SICK WITH THE FEVER.


Now, boys, fancy yourselves transported into the midst of a very dense
and dark forest, where the trees never shed their leaves all at one
time, where there is no food to be had, except what you can get with
your gun, and where wild beasts prowl around you at night, while you
sleep.

I found myself in such a place.

Immediately after we arrived in those gloomy solitudes we began to
build an olako to shelter us from the rains.

I must tell you that Benito is a very strange country. It is situated,
as you have seen by the map, near the equator. Of course, you know
what the equator is? There, at a certain time of the year, the sun is
directly above your head at noon, and hence it is the hottest part of
the earth. The days and nights are of the same length. The sun rises at
six o'clock in the morning, and the sunset takes place at six o'clock
in the evening. There is only a difference of a few minutes all the
year round. There is no twilight, and half an hour before sunrise
or after sunset it is dark. There is no snow, except on very high
mountains. There is no winter. There are only two seasons--the rainy
season and the dry season. Our winter time at home is the time of the
rainy season in Equatorial Africa, and it is also the hottest period
of the year. It rains harder there than in any other country. No such
rain is to be witnessed either in the United States or Europe. And as
to the thunder and lightning! You never have heard or seen the like;
it is enough to make the hair on your head stand on end. Then come the
tornados, a kind of hurricane which, for a few minutes, blows with
terrific violence, carrying before it great trees. How wild the sky
looks! How awful to see the black clouds sweeping through the sky with
fearful velocity!

So you will not wonder that we busied ourselves in preparing our
shelter, for I remember well it was in the month of February. We
took good care not to have big trees around us, for fear they might
be hurled upon us by a tornado, and bury us all alive under their
weight. Accordingly we built our olako near the banks of a beautiful
little stream, so that we could get as much water as we wanted. Then
we immediately began to fell trees. We carried two or three axes with
us, for the axe is an indispensable article in the forests. With the
foliage we made a shelter to keep off the rain.

While the men were busy building the olako, the women went in search
of dried wood to cook our supper. We had brought some food from the
village with us.

We were ready just in time. A most terrific tornado came upon us. The
rain poured down in torrents. The thunder was stunning. The lightning
flashed so vividly and often as nearly to blind us.

Our dogs had hidden themselves, indeed all animals and birds of the
forest were much frightened, which was not to be wondered at. How
thankful I was to be sheltered from such a storm! We had collected
plenty of fuel, and our fires burned brightly.

We formed a strange group while seated around the fires, the men and
women smoking their pipes and telling stories. We had several fires,
and, as they blazed up, their glare was thrown out through the gloom
of the forest, and filled it with fantastic shadows. Though tired,
everybody seemed merry. We were full of hope for the morrow. Every one
spoke of the particular animal he wished to kill, and of which he was
most fond. Some wished for an antelope, others for an elephant, a wild
boar, or a buffalo. I confess that I myself inclined towards the wild
boar; and I believe that almost every one had the same wish, for that
animal, when fat, is very good eating. Indeed, they already began to
talk as if the pig were actually before them. All fancied they could
eat a whole leg apiece, and their mouths fairly watered in thinking
about it. No wonder they are so fond of meat, they have it so seldom.
Who among us does not relish a good dinner, I should like to know?

By-and-by all became silent; one after the other we fell asleep, with
the exception of two or three men who were to watch over the fires and
keep them bright; for there were plenty of leopards prowling in the
neighbouring forest, and none of us wanted to serve as a meal for them.
In fact, before going to sleep, we heard some of these animals howling
in the far distance. During the night, one came very near our camp. He
went round and round; and, no doubt, lay in wait to see if one of us
would go out alone; and then he would have pounced upon the careless
fellow. I need not say we did not give him a chance; and you may be
sure we kept the fire blazing. Finally, we fired a few guns, and he
went off.

These leopards are dreadful animals, and eat a great many natives.
They are generally shy; but once they have tasted human flesh, they
become very fond of it, and the poor natives are carried off, one after
another, in such numbers that the villages have to be abandoned.

The next day we went hunting. I had hardly gone into the forest when
I saw, creeping on the ground under the dry leaves, an enormous black
snake: I fancy I see it still. How close it was to me! One step more
and I should have just trodden upon it, and then should have been
bitten, and a few minutes after have died, and then, boys, you know
I should have had nothing to tell you about Africa. This snake was a
cobra of the black variety (_Dendrapspis angusticeps_). It is a very
common snake in that region; and, as I have said, very poisonous.

As soon as the reptile saw me, he rose up, as if ready to spring upon
me, gave one of his hissing sounds, and looked at me, showing, as he
hissed, his sharp-pointed tongue. Of course, the first thing I did
was to make a few steps backward. Then, levelling my gun, I fired
and killed him. He was about eight feet long. I cut his head off,
and examined his deadly fangs. What horrible things they were! They
looked exactly like fish bones, with very sharp ends. I looked at
them carefully, and saw that he could raise and lower them at will;
while the teeth are firmly implanted in a pouch, or little bag, which
contains the poison. I saw in the end of the fang a little hole, which
communicated with the pouch. When the snake opens his mouth to bite, he
raises his fangs. Then he strikes them into the flesh of the animal he
bites, and brings a pressure on the pouch, and the poison comes out by
the little hole I have spoken of.

I cut open the cobra, and found in his stomach a very large bird.
Andèké packed the bird and snake in leaves, and, on our return to the
camp, the men were delighted. In the evening they made a nice soup of
the snake, which they ate with great relish.

I had also killed a beautiful little striped squirrel, upon which I
made my dinner. I felt almost sorry to kill it, it was such a pretty
creature.

In the evening, as I was siting by the fire, and looking at the log
that was burning, I spied a big ugly black scorpion coming out of one
of the crevices. I immediately laid upon its back a little stick which
I had in my hand. You should have seen how its long tail flew up and
stung the piece of wood! I shuddered as I thought that it might have
stung my feet or hands, instead of the wood. I immediately killed it,
and the natives said these scorpions were quite common, and that people
have to be careful when they handle dry sticks of wood, for these
poisonous creatures delight to live under the dry bark, or between the
crevices.

A nice country this to live in! thought I, after killing a snake and a
scorpion the same day!

So when I lay down on my pillow, which was merely a piece of wood, I
looked up to see if there was any scorpions upon it. I did not see any;
but, during the night, I awoke suddenly and started up. I thought I
felt hundreds of them creeping over me, and that one had just stung me,
and caused me to wake up. The sweat covered my body. I looked around
and saw nothing but sleeping people. There was no scorpion to be found.
I must have been dreaming.

Not far from our camp was a beautiful little prairie. I had seen,
during my rambles there, several footprints of wild buffaloes; so I
immediately told Andèké we must go in chase of them. Andèké, the son of
the king, was a very nice fellow, and was, besides, a good hunter--just
the very man I wanted.

So we went towards the little prairie, and lay hidden on the borders of
it, among the trees. By-and-by I spied a huge bull, who was perfectly
unaware of my presence, for the wind blew from him to me; had the wind
blown the other way, the animal would have scented me and made off. As
it was, he came slowly towards me. I raised my gun and fired. My bullet
struck a creeper, on its way, and glanced aside, so I only wounded the
beast. Turning fiercely, he rushed at me in a furious manner, with his
head down. I was scared; for I was, at that time, but a young hunter;
I got ready to run, though I had a second barrel in reserve. I thought
the infuriated bull was too powerful for me, he looked so big. Just as
I was about to make my escape, I found my foot entangled and hopelessly
caught in a tough and thorny creeper. The bull was dashing towards me
with head down and eyes inflamed, tearing down brushwood and creepers,
which barred his progress. Turning to meet the enemy, I felt my nerves
suddenly grow firm as a rock. If I missed the bull all would be over
with me. He would gore me to death. I took time to aim carefully, and
then fired at his head. He gave one loud, hoarse bellow, and tumbled
almost at my feet. In the meantime, Andèké was coming to the rescue.

I must say I felt very nervous after all was over. But being but a lad,
I thought I had done pretty well. It was the first direct attack a wild
beast had ever made upon me. I found afterwards, that the bulls are
generally very dangerous when wounded.

Now I must tell you how this beast looked. He was one of the wild
buffaloes frequently to be met with in this part of Africa. During
the greater part of the day they hide in the forest. When much hunted
they become very shy. They are generally found in herds of from ten to
twenty-five, though I have found them sometimes in much greater number.

This animal (_Bos brachicheros_) is called by some of the natives
"niaré." It is of the size of our cattle. It is covered with thin red
hair, which is much darker in the bull than in the cow. The hoofs are
long and sharp; the ears are fringed with most beautiful silky hair;
the horns are very handsome, and bend backward in a graceful curve.
In shape, the buffalo looks like something between an antelope and
a common cow; and, when seen afar off, you might think these wild
buffaloes were a herd of cattle at home.

How glad the people were when Andèké and I brought the news that we had
killed a bull! There was great rejoicing. But I was tired and remained
in the camp; while they went with knives and swords to cut the buffalo
to pieces, and bring in the flesh.

What a fine place it was for hunting! The animals seemed to come down
from the mountains beyond, and remain in the flat woody country along
the seashore.

There were a great many wild boars. You know we all wanted one of
these. So one night Andèké and I agreed to go and lie in wait for them
on the prairie. In order to look like Andèké, I blackened my face and
hands with charcoal, so that in the night the colour of my face could
not be distinguished.

We started from the camp before dark, and reached the prairie before
night. I stationed myself behind a large ant-hill not far from the
open space. There I lay; one hour passed--two hours--three hours, and
still neither wild boar nor buffaloes. I looked at Andèké. He was fast
asleep, at the foot of another ant-hill close by. Once I saw a whole
herd of gazelles pass by; but they were too far from me. Occasionally a
grunt or the cracking of a twig, told me that a wild boar was not far
off. At last everything became silent, and I fell asleep unconsciously.

Suddenly I was awakened by an unearthly roar--the yell of a wild beast.

I rubbed my eyes in a hurry--what could be the matter?

I looked round me, and saw nothing. The woods were still resounding
with the cry that had startled me. Then I heard a great crash in the
forest, made by some heavy animal running away. Then I saw emerge from
the forest a wild bull, on whose neck crouched an immense leopard. The
poor buffalo reared, tossed, roared and bellowed; but in vain. The
leopard's enormous claws were firmly fixed in his victim's body, while
his teeth were sunk deeply in the bull's neck. The leopard gave an
awful roar, which seemed to make the earth shake. Then both buffalo and
leopard disappeared in the forest, and the roars, and the crashing of
the trees, soon ceased. All became silent again.

I had fired at the leopard, but it was too far off. We stayed a week
here, and I enjoyed myself very much in the woods. I collected birds
and butterflies, killed a few nice little quadrupeds, and then we
returned to the seashore village. There the fever laid me low on my
bed of sickness. How wretched I felt! I had never had the fever before.
For a few days my head was burning hot. When I got better, and looked
at myself in my little looking-glass I could not recognise myself; I
had not a particle of colour left in my cheeks and I looked as yellow
and pale as a lemon. I got frightened. This fever was the forerunner of
what I had to expect in these equatorial regions.

[Illustration]




[Illustration: ENTICING THE LEOPARD.]

CHAPTER IV.

  A VILLAGE ON THE SEASHORE--LYING IN WAIT FOR A LEOPARD.


On the promontory called Cape St. John, about a degree north of the
Equator stood a Mbinga village, whose chief was called Imonga. This
was, I think, in the year 1852. The country around was very wild. The
village stood on the top of a high hill which ran out into the sea,
and formed the cape itself. The waves there beat with great violence
against a rock of the tertiary formation. It was a grand sight to see
those angry billows white with foam dashing against the shore. You
could see that they were wearing away the rock. To land there safely
was very difficult. There were only two or three places where between
the rocks a canoe could reach the shore. The people were as wild as the
country round them, and very warlike. They were great fishermen, and
many of them spent their whole time fishing in their little canoes.
Game being very scarce, there were but few hunters.

Imonga, the chief, had a hideous large scar on his face, which showed
at once that he was a fighting man. Not a few of his men showed signs
of wounds which they had received in battle. Many of these fights or
quarrels took place in canoes on the water, among themselves, or with
people of other villages.

I do not know why, but Imonga was very fond of me, and so also were his
people. But one thing revolted me. I found that several of Imonga's
wives had the first joint of their little finger cut off. Imonga
did this to make them mind him; for he wanted his wives to obey him
implicitly.

The woods around the village were full of leopards. They were the
dread of the people, for they were constantly carrying off some one.
At night, they would come into the villages on their errands of blood,
while the villagers were asleep. There was not a dog nor a goat left;
and within two months three people had been eaten by them; the very
places could be seen in the huts where the leopards had entered. They
would tear up the thin thatched palm leaves of the roofs, and having
seized their victims, they would go back through the hole with a
tremendous leap, and with the man in their jaws, and run off into the
forest.

The last man taken uttered a piercing cry of anguish, which awoke
all the villagers. They at once arose and came to the rescue, but it
was too late. They only found traces of blood as they proceeded. The
leopard had gone far into the woods, and there devoured his victim. Of
course there was tremendous excitement, and they went into the forest
in search of the leopard; but he could never be found. There were so
many of these savage beasts that they even walked along the beach, not
satisfied with the woods alone; and when the tide was low, during the
night, the footprints of their large paws could be seen distinctly
marked on the sand. After ten or eleven o'clock at night, no native
could be seen on the seashore without torches.

During the day the leopard hides himself either in the hollow of some
one of the gigantic trees, with which these forests abound, or sleeps
quietly on some branch, waiting for the approach of night. He seldom
goes out before one o'clock in the morning, unless pressed by hunger,
and about four o'clock he goes back to his lair.

I was now getting accustomed to face danger. Killing the buffalo that
attacked me had given me confidence.

To kill a leopard must be my next exploit.

I selected a spot very near the sands of the sea, where I remarked the
leopards used to come every night, when the tide was low. I chose a day
when the moon began to rise at midnight, so that it might not be so
dark that I could not take a good aim at the leopard, and see what was
going on.

I then began to build a kind of pen or fortress; and I can assure you
I worked very hard at it. Every day I went into the forest and cut
branches of trees, with which I made a strong palisade. Every stick
was about six feet high, and was put in the ground about a foot deep.
These posts were fastened together with strong creepers. My little
fortress, for so I must call it, was about five feet square. This would
never answer; for the leopard might leap inside and take hold of me.
So with the help of some strong branches all tied strongly together I
built a roof. Then I made loopholes on all sides for my guns, so that I
might fire at the beast whenever he came in sight.

I was glad when I had finished, for I felt very tired. My axe was not
sharp, and it had required several days to complete my work.

One clear starlight night, at about nine o'clock, I went and shut
myself up in my fortress. I had taken a goat with me, which I tied a
few yards from my place of concealment. It was quite dark. After I had
tied the goat, I went back and shut myself very securely inside my
stronghold.

I waited and waited, but no leopard came. The goat cried all the time.
It was so dark that even if the leopard had come I could not have seen
it.

The moon rose by one o'clock. It was in its last quarter; and very
strange and fantastic it made everything look. There were the shadows
of the tall trees thrown upon the white sand of the beach, while in
the forest the gloom was somewhat greater. The sea came rolling on
the beach in gentle waves, which, as they broke, sent up thousands of
bright, phosphorescent flashes. There was a dead silence everywhere,
except when the goat cried, or some wild beast made the forest resound
with its dismal howl. The wind whispered gently, mournfully through the
woods.

I could not account for it, but now and then a cold shudder ran through
me. I was quite alone, for the negro I had taken with me was fast
asleep.

One o'clock. No leopard. I looked in vain all round me: I could see
nothing.

Two o'clock. Nothing yet.

Suddenly, I spied something a long way off on the beach, so far that I
could not make out what it was. It came slowly towards me. What could
it be? I asked myself. Soon I recognised a big spotted leopard. The
goat, which had seen it, began to cry more loudly. The big beast came
nearer and nearer. He began to crouch. Then he lay flat on the ground.
How his eyes glittered! They looked like two pieces of bright, burning
charcoal.

My heart beat. The first thought that came to me was--Is my house
strong enough to resist his attack, in case I should wound him, or if,
perchance, he should prefer me to the goat, and make an onslaught upon
it?

The savage beast crawled nearer, and again crouched down on the ground.
I took my gun; and, just as I was getting ready to fire, he made an
immense leap, and bounded upon the goat. I fired. I do not know how,
but, in the twinkling of an eye, the goat was seized, and both leopard
and goat disappeared in the dark forest. I fired again, but with no
better success. In the morning, I saw nothing but the traces of the
poor goat's blood.

I did not return to the village till morning; for I dared not go
outside of my palisade that night. So, the goat being gone, I concluded
I had better light a fire, to warm myself, and drive away the
mosquitoes. I always carried a box of matches with me. I struck one,
and soon succeeded in making a blaze with the little firewood I had
collected.

Strange enough I must have looked, inside of my cage, while the fire
sent its glimmering light around.

Finally, seeing that everything was well secured, I went to sleep,
taking good care to put myself in the middle of the fort, so that if,
by any chance, a leopard came, he could not get hold of me with his
paw. When I awoke it was broad daylight, and I immediately started for
Imonga's village.

[Illustration]




[Illustration: FLOCKS OF BIRDS.]

CHAPTER V.

  THE BAY OF CORISCO--THE MANGROVE TREES--THE WONDERFUL FLOCKS OF
  BIRDS--WHAT I FOUND IN THE POUCH OF A PELICAN--HOW AN OLD KING IS
  BURIED, AND THE NEW KING CROWNED.


Now that you have followed me in the Benito country, and to Cape St.
John, I will take you a little further down the coast to the Bay of
Corisco. There, two rivers empty their waters into the sea. One of them
is called the Muni river, and the other the Monda.

I will leave the Muni, for we shall have to come to it by-and-by, and
will speak to you only of the Monda. It is throughout a low-banked
swampy stream. The banks are covered with mangrove trees. Every limb or
branch that grows in the water is covered with oysters--real oysters
too; so that at low tide you can see, in some places for a long
distance, immense beds of this kind of shell-fish.

The mangroves, on which the oysters grow so curiously, are very
extraordinary trees. The main trunk, or parent tree, grows to an
immense size. From a single tree a whole forest will grow up in time,
for the branches send down shoots into the ground, which in their turn
take root and become trees; so that, generally, almost the whole of the
mangrove forest may be said to be knitted together.

The inhabitants of the country at the mouth of the river are called
Shekiani. They are a very warlike tribe, and many of them are armed
with guns, which they obtain from the vessels that come here from time
to time to buy bar wood, ivory, or india-rubber.

I arrived at the mouth of the river, in a small canoe, manned by
several Mbinga men. The canoe was made of the trunk of a single tree,
and had a mat for a sail. At the mouth of the river, high above the
swamps that surround its banks, are two hills. On the top of one of
these hills, a village was situated. There I stayed. It was a village
of insignificant size.

At low tide, the high muddy banks of the river are exposed. So many
birds as are there, I never saw elsewhere: they are to be seen in
countless thousands. The shore, the mud islands, and the water were so
covered with them, that it was really a sight worth seeing. Here and
there flocks of pelicans swam majestically along, keeping at a good
distance from my canoe. You would probably wish to know what these
pelicans are like. I will tell you. They are large birds, and have
an enormous bill, under which is a large pouch, capable of containing
several pounds of fish. They have webbed feet, and their feathers are
white. I wish you could see them looking out for their prey. How slyly
they pry in the water for the fish they are in search of, and how
quickly they pounce upon them unawares with their powerful beak! In an
instant the fish are killed and stored away in the pouch; and when this
is full, then Master Pelican begins to eat. The fish are put in the
pouch as if it were a storehouse.

Now and then a string of flamingoes go stretching along the muddy
shore, looking for all the world like a line of fire. Most beautiful
are these flamingoes! and very singular they appear when not on the
wing, but standing still on their long red legs! They are very wild,
however, and difficult of approach.

Wherever the mud peeped out of the water, there were herons, cranes,
gulls of various kinds. Scattered everywhere were seen those beautiful
white birds (_Egretta flavirostris_). Some of the shore trees were
covered with them, looking like snow in the distance.

Of course I wished to kill some of these birds. So I took a tiny little
canoe, and covered it with branches of trees, that the birds might
think it was a tree coming down the stream, as is often the case.
Then I took a Shekiani with me to paddle, and, putting two guns in
the canoe, we made for the pelicans. The sly birds seemed to suspect
something, and did not give me a chance to approach them for a long
time. But, as you know, in order to succeed in anything, people must
have patience and perseverance. So, after chasing many, I finally
succeeded in approaching one. He was just in the act of swallowing a
big fish, when--bang!--I fired, and wounded him so that he could not
fly. His wing had been broken by my shot. At the noise made by firing
my gun, the birds flew away by thousands. I made for Master Pelican.
The chase became exciting; but at last we succeeded in coming near him.
But how to get hold of him was now the question. His wing only was
broken; and, with his great beak, he might perhaps be able to cut one
of my fingers right off. I was afraid to spoil his feat