Produced by Louise Hope, Paul Murray and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net





[Transcriber's Note:

This text is intended for users whose text readers cannot use the
"real" (unicode/utf-8) version of the file. A few Greek words have been
transliterated and shown between =marks=; the one reference to long "s"
is shown as [s].

The printed text used small capitals for emphasis. These have been
replaced with +marks+ where appropriate. Missing lines were shown
by rows of widely spaced dots (single lines) or asterisks (longer
sections). They are shown here in groups of three:

    ...   ...   ...
  or
    ***   ***   ***

All brackets are in the original, except footnotes and similar material.
Sidenote references in the Appendix are unchanged from the original.
Errors are listed at the end of the e-text.]

       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *
       *       *       *       *       *

_Uniform with this Volume_


POPULAR BALLADS OF THE OLDEN TIME

FIRST SERIES. Ballads of Romance and Chivalry.


'It forms an excellent introduction to a sadly neglected source of
poetry.... We ... hope that it will receive ample encouragement.'
--_Athenæum_.

'It will certainly, if carried out as it is begun, constitute a boon to
the lover of poetry.... We shall look with anxiety for the following
volumes of what will surely be the best popular edition in existence.'
--_Notes and Queries_.

'There can be nothing but praise for the selection, editing, and notes,
which are all excellent and adequate. It is, in fine, a valuable volume
of what bids fair to be a very valuable series.' --_Academy_.

'The most serviceable edition of the ballads yet published in England.'
--_Manchester Guardian_.

    [Transcriber's Note:
    The First Series is available from Project Gutenberg as e-text
    20469. All references to "First Series" are to this volume.
    The Third Series (not listed here) is "Ballads of Scottish
    Tradition and Romance", e-text 20624. The Fourth Series, "Ballads
    of Robin Hood and other Outlaws", is in preparation.]




  POPULAR BALLADS
  OF THE OLDEN TIME
  SELECTED AND EDITED
  BY FRANK SIDGWICK

  Second Series. Ballads of
  Mystery and Miracle and
  Fyttes of Mirth

  'Gar print me ballants weel, she said,
    Gar print me ballants many.'




  A. H. BULLEN
  47 Great Russell Street
  London. MCMIV




  'What man of taste and feeling can endure
   _rifacimenti_, harmonies, abridgments,
   expurgated editions?'

      Macaulay.




CONTENTS
                                                        Page

  Preface                                                 ix
  Ballads in the Second Series                             x
  Additional Note on Ballad Commonplaces                 xvi

  Thomas Rymer                                             1
  The Queen of Elfan's Nourice                             6
  Allison Gross                                            9
  The Laily Worm and the Machrel of the Sea               12
  Kemp Owyne                                              16
  Willie's Lady                                           19
  The Wee Wee Man                                         24
  Cospatrick                                              26
  Young Akin                                              32
  The Unquiet Grave                                       41
  Clerk Colven                                            43
  Tam Lin                                                 47
  The Clerk's Twa Sons o' Owsenford                       56
    The Wife of Usher's Well                              60
  The Great Silkie of Sule Skerrie                        63
  Clerk Sanders                                           66
  Young Hunting                                           74
  The Three Ravens                                        80
    The Twa Corbies                                       82
  Young Benjie                                            83
  The Lyke-Wake Dirge                                     88
  The Bonny Earl of Murray                                92
  Bonnie George Campbell                                  95
  The Lament of the Border Widow                          97
  Bonny Bee Ho'm                                         100
    The Lowlands of Holland                              102
  Fair Helen of Kirconnell                               104
  Sir Hugh, or The Jew's Daughter                        107
  The Dæmon Lover                                        112
  The Broomfield Hill                                    115
  Willie's Fatal Visit                                   119
  Adam                                                   123
  Saint Stephen and King Herod                           125
  The Cherry-Tree Carol                                  129
  The Carnal and the Crane                               133
  Dives and Lazarus                                      139
  Brown Robyn's Confession                               143
  Judas                                                  145
  The Maid and the Palmer                                152
  Lady Isabel and the Elf-Knight                         155
  A Noble Riddle Wisely Expounded                        159
  Captain Wedderburn                                     162
  The Elphin Knight                                      170
  King John and the Abbot                                173
  The Fause Knight upon the Road                         180
  The Lord of Learne                                     182
  The Bailiff's Daughter of Islington                    202
  Glenlogie                                              205
  King Orfeo                                             208
  The Baffled Knight                                     212
  Our Goodman                                            215
  The Friar in the Well                                  221
  The Knight and the Shepherd's Daughter                 224
  Get Up and Bar the Door                                231

  Appendix                                               235
    The Grey Selchie of Shool Skerry                     235
    The Lyke-wake Dirge                                  238
  Index of Titles                                        245
  Index of First Lines                                   247




PREFACE


The issue of this second volume of _Popular Ballads of the Olden Time_
has been delayed chiefly by the care given to the texts, in most
instances the whole requiring to be copied by hand.

I consider myself fortunate to be enabled, by the kind service of
my friend Mr. A. Francis Steuart, to print for the first time in a
collection of ballads the version of the _Grey Selchie of Shool Skerry_
given in the Appendix. It is a feather in the cap of any ballad-editor
after Professor Child to discover a ballad that escaped his eye.

My thanks are also due to the Rev. Professor W. W. Skeat for assistance
generously given in connection with the ballad of _Judas_; and, as
before, to Mr. A. H. Bullen.

  F. S.




BALLADS IN THE SECOND SERIES


The ballads in the present volume have been classified roughly so
as to fall under the heads (i) Ballads of Superstition and of the
Supernatural, including Dirges (pp. 1-122); (ii) Ballads of Sacred
Origin (pp. 123-154); (iii) Ballads of Riddle and Repartee (pp.
155-181); and (iv) a few ballads, otherwise almost unclassifiable,
collected under the title of 'Fyttes of Mirth,' or Merry Ballads
(pp. 182 to end).


I

That the majority of the ballads in the first section are Scottish can
hardly cause surprise. Superstition lurks amongst the mountains and in
the corners of the earth. And, with one remarkable exception, all the
best lyrical work in these ballads of the supernatural is to be found in
the Scots. _Thomas Rymer_, _Tam Lin_, _The Wife of Usher's Well_, _Clerk
Sanders_, and _The Dæmon Lover_, are perhaps the most notable examples
amongst the ballads proper, and _Fair Helen of Kirconnell_, _The Twa
Corbies_, and _Bonnie George Campbell_ amongst the dirges. All these
are known wherever poetry is read.

  'For dulness, the creeping Saxons;
  For beauty and amorousness, the Gaedhills.'

But the exception referred to above, _The Unquiet Grave_, is true
English, and yet lyrical, singing itself, like a genuine ballad, to a
tune as one reads.

The complete superstition hinted at in this ballad should perhaps be
stated more fully. It is obvious that excessive mourning is fatal to
the peace of the dead; but it is also to be noticed that it is almost
equally fatal to the mourner. The mourner in _The Unquiet Grave_ is
refused the kiss demanded, as it will be fatal. _Clerk Sanders_, on the
other hand, has lost--if ever it possessed--any trace of this doctrine.
For Margret does not die; though she would have died had she kissed him,
we notice, and the kiss was demanded by her and refused by him: and
Clerk Sanders is only disturbed in his grave because he has not got back
his troth-plight. The method of giving this back--the stroking of a
wand--we have had before in _The Brown Girl_ (First Series, pp. 60-62,
st. 14).

In the Helgi cycle of Early Western epics (_Corpus Poeticum Boreale_,
vol. i. pp. 128 ff.), Helgi the hero is slain, and returns as a ghost to
his lady, who follows him to his grave. But her tears are bad for him:
they fall in blood on his corpse.

The subject of the Lyke-wake would easily bear a monograph to itself,
and at present I know of none. I have therefore ventured, in choosing
Aubrey's version in place of the better known one printed--and doubtless
written over--by Sir Walter Scott, to give rather fuller information
concerning the Dirge, its folklore, and its bibliography. A short study
of the ramifications of the various superstitions incorporated therein
leads to a sort of surprise that there is no popular ballad treating of
the subject of St. Patrick's Purgatory, which has attracted more than
one English poet. Thomas Wright's volume on the subject, however, is
delightful and instructive reading.


II

The short section of Ballads of Sacred Origin contains all that we
possess in England--notice that only two have Scottish variants, even
fragmentary--and somewhat more than can be classified as ballads with
strictness. Yet I would fain have added other of our 'masterless'
carols, which to-day seem to survive chiefly in the West of England.
One of their best lovers, Mr. Quiller-Couch, has complained that, after
promising himself to include a representative selection of carols in his
anthology, he was chagrined to discover that they lost their quaint
delicacy when placed among other more artificial lyrics. Perhaps they
would have been more at home set amongst these ballads; but I have
excluded them with the less regret in remembering that they stand well
alone in the collections of Sylvester, Sandys, Husk; in the reprints of
Thomas Wright; and, in more recent years, in the selections of Mr. A. H.
Bullen and Canon Beeching.

_The Maid and the Palmer_ would appear to be the only ballad of Christ's
wanderings on the earth that we possess, just as _Brown Robyn's
Confession_ is the only one of the miracles of the Virgin. One may
guess, however, that others have descended rapidly into nursery rhymes,
as in the case of one, noted in J. O. Halliwell's collection, which, in
its absence, may be called _The Owl, or the Baker's Daughter_. For
Ophelia knew that they said the owl was the baker's daughter. And the
story of her metamorphosis is exactly paralleled by the Norse story of
_Gertrude's Bird_, translated by Dasent.

Gertrude was an old woman with a red mutch on her head, who was kneading
dough, when Christ came wandering by, and asked for a small bannock.
Gertrude took a niggardly pinch of dough, and began to roll it into a
bannock; but as she rolled, it grew, until she put it aside as too
large to give away, and took a still smaller pinch. This also grew
miraculously, and was put aside. The same thing happened a third time,
till she said, 'I cannot roll you a small bannock.' Then Christ said,
'For your selfishness, you shall become a bird, and seek your food
'twixt bark and bole.' Gertrude at once became a bird, and flew up
into a tree with a screech. And to this day the great woodpecker of
Scandinavia is called 'Gertrude's Bird,' and has a red head.


III

The Ballads of Riddle and Repartee do not amount to very many in our
tongue. But they contain riddles which may be found in one form or
another in nearly every folklore on the earth. Even Samson had a riddle.
Always popular, they seem to have been especial favourites in early
Oriental literature, in the mediæval Latin races, and, in slightly more
modern times, amongst the Teutonic and Scandinavian peoples. Perhaps
_King John and the Abbot_ is the best English specimen, for it is to-day
as pleasing to an audience as it can ever have been. But _Lady Isabel
and the Elf Knight_, better known as _May Colvin_, is the most startling
of any, in its myriad ramifications and supposed origin.


IV

The 'Fyttes of Mirth' conclude the present volume. It may be as well to
say here that I have placed under this head any ballad that tells of a
successful issue and has a happy ending or mirthful climax.

The version I have given of that famous ballad _The Lord of Learne_ (or,
more commonly, _Lorne_) is most enchanting in its _naïveté_, and, when
read aloud or recited, is exceedingly effective. The curious remark that
the affectionate parting between the young Lord and his father and
mother would have changed even a Jew's heart; the picturesque
description of the siege of the castle, so close that 'a swallow could
not have flown away'; the sudden descent from romance to a judicial
trial; the remarkable assumption by the foreman of the jury of the
privileges of a judge; and the thoroughly satisfactory description of
the false steward's execution--

  'I-wis they did him curstly cumber!'

--all these help to form the ever-popular _Lord of Learne_.

The remaining 'Fyttes of Mirth' are mostly well known, and require no
further comment.




ADDITION TO GLOSSARY OF BALLAD COMMONPLACES

(See First Series, pp. xlvi-li)


The late Professor York Powell explained to me, since the note on 'gare'
(First Series, p. 1) was written, that the word means exactly what is
meant by 'gore' in modern dressmaking. The antique skirt was made of
four pieces: two cut square, to form the front and the back; and two of
a triangular shape, to fill the space between, the apex of the triangle,
of course, being at the waist. Thus a knife that 'hangs low down' by a
person's 'gare,' simply means that the knife hung at the side and not in
front.




THOMAS RYMER


+The Text.+--The best-known text of this famous ballad is that given by
Scott in the _Minstrelsy of the Scottish Border_, derived 'from a copy
obtained from a lady residing not far from Erceldoune, corrected and
enlarged by one in Mrs. Brown's MS.' Scott's ballad is compounded,
therefore, of a traditional version, and the one here given, from the
Tytler-Brown MS., which was printed by Jamieson with a few changes. It
does not mention Huntlie bank or the Eildon tree. Scott's text may be
seen printed parallel with Jamieson's in Professor J. A. H. Murray's
book referred to below.


+The Story.+--As early as the fourteenth century there lived a Thomas
of Erceldoune, or Thomas the Rhymer, who had a reputation as a seer
and prophet. His fame was not extinct in the nineteenth century, and
a collection of prophecies by him and Merlin and others, first issued
in 1603, could be found at the beginning of that century 'in most
farmhouses in Scotland' (Murray, _The Romance and Prophecies of Thomas
of Erceldoune_, E.E.T.S., 1875). The existence of a Thomas de Ercildoun,
son and heir of Thomas Rymour de Ercildoun, both living during the
thirteenth century, is recorded in contemporary documents.

A poem, extant in five manuscripts (all printed by Murray as above),
of which the earliest was written about the middle of the fifteenth
century, relates that Thomas of Erceldoune his prophetic powers were
given him by the Queen of Elfland, who bore him away to her country for
some years, and then restored him to this world lest he should be chosen
for the tribute paid to hell. So much is told in the first fytte, which
corresponds roughly to our ballad. The rest of the poem consists of
prophecies taught to him by the Queen.

The poem contains references to a still earlier story, which probably
narrated only the episode of Thomas's adventure in Elfland, and to which
the prophecies of Thomas Rymour of Ercildoun were added at a later date.
The story of Thomas and the Queen of Elfland is only another version of
a legend of Ogier le Danois and Morgan the Fay.

Our ballad is almost certainly derived directly from the poem, and the
version here given is not marred by the repugnant ending of Scott's
ballad, where Thomas objects to the gift of a tongue that can never lie.
But Scott's version retains Huntlie bank and the Eildon tree, both
mentioned in the old poem, and both exactly located during last century
at the foot of the Eildon Hills, above Melrose (see an interesting
account in Murray, _op. cit._, Introduction, pp. l-lii and footnotes).


THOMAS RYMER

  1.
  True Thomas lay o'er yond grassy bank,
    And he beheld a ladie gay,
  A ladie that was brisk and bold,
    Come riding o'er the fernie brae.

  2.
  Her skirt was of the grass-green silk,
    Her mantel of the velvet fine,
  At ilka tett of her horse's mane
    Hung fifty silver bells and nine.

  3.
  True Thomas he took off his hat,
    And bowed him low down till his knee:
  'All hail, thou mighty Queen of Heaven!
    For your peer on earth I never did see.'

  4.
  'O no, O no, True Thomas,' she says,
    'That name does not belong to me;
  I am but the queen of fair Elfland,
    And I'm come here for to visit thee.

  5.
  'But ye maun go wi' me now, Thomas,
    True Thomas, ye maun go wi' me,
  For ye maun serve me seven years,
    Thro' weel or wae, as may chance to be.'

  6.
  She turned about her milk-white steed,
    And took True Thomas up behind,
  And aye whene'er her bridle rang,
    The steed flew swifter than the wind.

  7.
  For forty days and forty nights
    He wade thro' red blude to the knee,
  And he saw neither sun nor moon,
    But heard the roaring of the sea.

  8.
  O they rade on, and further on,
    Until they came to a garden green:
  'Light down, light down, ye ladie free,
    Some of that fruit let me pull to thee.'

  9.
  'O no, O no, True Thomas,' she says,
    'That fruit maun not be touched by thee,
  For a' the plagues that are in hell
    Light on the fruit of this countrie.

  10.
  'But I have a loaf here in my lap,
    Likewise a bottle of claret wine,
  And now ere we go farther on,
    We'll rest a while, and ye may dine.'

  11.
  When he had eaten and drunk his fill;
    'Lay down your head upon my knee,'
  The lady sayd, 'ere we climb yon hill,
    And I will show you fairlies three.

  12.
  'O see not ye yon narrow road,
    So thick beset wi' thorns and briers?
  That is the path of righteousness,
    Tho' after it but few enquires.

  13.
  'And see not ye that braid braid road,
    That lies across yon lillie leven?
  That is the path of wickedness,
    Tho' some call it the road to heaven.

  14.
  'And see not ye that bonny road,
    Which winds about the fernie brae?
  That is the road to fair Elfland,
    Where you and I this night maun gae.

  15.
  'But, Thomas, ye maun hold your tongue,
    Whatever you may hear or see,
  For gin ae word you should chance to speak,
    You will ne'er get back to your ain countrie.'

  16.
  He has gotten a coat of the even cloth,
    And a pair of shoes of velvet green,
  And till seven years were past and gone
    True Thomas on earth was never seen.


    [Annotations:
    2.3: 'tett,' lock or bunch of hair.
    7: 7 is 15 in the MS.
    8.2: 'garden': '_golden green_, if my copy is right.' --Child.
    11.4: 'fairlies,' marvels.
    13.2: 'lillie leven,' smooth lawn set with lilies.
    16.1: 'even cloth,' cloth with the nap worn off.]




THE QUEEN OF ELFAN'S NOURICE


+The Text.+--As printed in Sharpe's Ballad Book, from the Skene MS.
(No. 8). It is fragmentary--regrettably so, especially as stanzas 10-12
belong to _Thomas Rymer_.


+The Story+ is the well-known one of the abduction of a young mother to
be the Queen of Elfland's nurse. Fairies, elves, water-sprites, and
nisses or brownies, have constantly required mortal assistance in the
nursing of fairy children. Gervase of Tilbury himself saw a woman stolen
away for this purpose, as she was washing clothes in the Rhone.

The genuineness of this ballad, deficient as it is, is best proved by
its lyrical nature, which, as Child says, 'forces you to chant, and will
not be read.'

'Elfan,' of course, is Elfland; 'nourice,' a nurse.


THE QUEEN OF ELFAN'S NOURICE

  1.
  'I heard a cow low, a bonnie cow low,
    An' a cow low down in yon glen;
  Lang, lang, will my young son greet
    Or his mother bid him come ben.

  2.
  'I heard a cow low, a bonnie cow low,
    An' a cow low down in yon fauld;
  Lang, lang will my young son greet
    Or his mither take him frae cauld.

    ***   ***   ***

  3.
  ' ...   ...   ...
    ...   ...   ...
  Waken, Queen of Elfan,
    An' hear your nourice moan.'

  4.
  'O moan ye for your meat,
    Or moan ye for your fee,
  Or moan ye for the ither bounties
    That ladies are wont to gie?'

  5.
  'I moan na for my meat,
    Nor moan I for my fee,
  Nor moan I for the ither bounties
    That ladies are wont to gie.

  6.
  ' ...   ...   ...
    ...   ...   ...
  But I moan for my young son
    I left in four nights auld.

  7.
  'I moan na for my meat,
    Nor yet for my fee,
  But I mourn for Christen land,
    It's there I fain would be.'

  8.
  'O nurse my bairn, nourice,' she says,
    'Till he stan' at your knee,
  An' ye's win hame to Christen land,
    Whar fain it's ye wad be.

  9.
  'O keep my bairn, nourice,
    Till he gang by the hauld,
  An' ye's win hame to your young son
    Ye left in four nights auld.'

    ***   ***   ***

  10.
  'O nourice lay your head
    Upo' my knee:
  See ye na that narrow road
    Up by yon tree?

  11.
    ...   ...   ...
    ...   ...   ...
  That's the road the righteous goes,
    And that's the road to heaven.

  12.
  'An' see na ye that braid road,
    Down by yon sunny fell?
  Yon's the road the wicked gae,
    An' that's the road to hell.'

    ***   ***   ***


    [Annotations:
    1.4: 'ben,' within.
    9.2: _i.e._ till he can walk by holding on to things.]




ALLISON GROSS


+The Text+ is that of the Jamieson-Brown MS.


+The Story+ is one of the countless variations of the French 'Beauty and
the Beast.' A modern Greek tale narrates that a nereid, enamoured of a
youth, and by him scorned, turned him into a snake till he should find
another love as fair as she.

The feature of this ballad is that the queen of the fairies should have
power to undo the evil done by a witch.


ALLISON GROSS

  1.
  O Allison Gross, that lives in yon tow'r,
    The ugliest witch i' the north country,
  Has trysted me ae day up till her bow'r,
    An' monny fair speech she made to me.

  2.
  She stroaked my head, an' she kembed my hair,
    An' she set me down saftly on her knee;
  Says, 'Gin ye will be my lemman so true,
    Sae monny braw things as I woud you gi'.'

  3.
  She show'd me a mantle o' red scarlet,
    Wi' gouden flow'rs an' fringes fine;
  Says, 'Gin ye will be my lemman sae true,
    This goodly gift it sal be thine.'

  4.
  'Awa', awa', ye ugly witch,
    Haud far awa', an' lat me be;
  I never will be your lemman sae true,
    An' I wish I were out o' your company.'

  5.
  She neist brought a sark o' the saftest silk,
    Well wrought wi' pearles about the ban';
  Says, 'Gin ye will be my ain true love,
    This goodly gift you sal comman'.'

  6.
  She show'd me a cup o' the good red gold,
    Well set wi' jewls sae fair to see;
  Says, 'Gin you will be my lemman sae true,
    This goodly gift I will you gi'.'

  7.
  'Awa', awa', ye ugly witch,
    Had far awa', and lat me be!
  For I woudna ance kiss your ugly mouth
    For a' the gifts that you coud gi'.'

  8.
  She's turn'd her right and roun' about,
    An' thrice she blaw on a grass-green horn;
  An' she sware by the meen and the stars abeen,
    That she'd gar me rue the day I was born.

  9.
  Then out has she ta'en a silver wand,
    An' she's turn'd her three times roun' and roun';
  She's mutter'd sich words till my strength it fail'd,
    An' I fell down senceless upon the groun'.

  10.
  She's turn'd me into an ugly worm,
    And gard me toddle about the tree;
  An' ay, on ilka Saturday's night,
    My sister Maisry came to me;

  11.
  Wi' silver bason and silver kemb,
    To kemb my heady upon her knee;
  But or I had kiss'd her ugly mouth,
    I'd rather 'a' toddled about the tree.

  12.
  But as it fell out on last Hallow-even,
    When the seely court was ridin' by,
  The queen lighted down on a gowany bank,
    Nae far frae the tree where I wont to lye.

  13.
  She took me up in her milk-white han',
    An' she's stroak'd me three times o'er her knee;
  She chang'd me again to my ain proper shape,
    And I nae mair maun toddle about the tree.


    [Annotations:
    5.1: 'sark,' shirt.
    12.2: 'the seely court,' _i.e._ the fairies' court.
    12.3: 'gowany,' daisied.]




THE LAILY WORM AND THE MACHREL OF THE SEA


+The Text+ of this mutilated ballad is taken from the Skene MS., where
it was written down from recitation in the North of Scotland about 1802.


+The Story+ is of a double transformation of a sister and brother by a
stepmother. Compare the story of _The Marriage of Sir Gawaine_ (First
Series, p. 108). _Allison Gross_ should be compared closely with this
ballad. The combing of hair seems to be a favourite method of expressing
affection, not only in these ballads, but also in Scandinavian folklore.
It is needless to take exception to the attribution either of hair to a
worm, or of knees to a machrel: though we may note that in one version
of _Dives and Lazarus_ Dives 'has a place prepared in hell to sit on a
serpent's knee.' However, it is probable that a part of the ballad, now
lost, stated that the machrel (whatever it may be) reassumed human shape
'every Saturday at noon.'


THE LAILY WORM AND THE MACHREL OF THE SEA

  1.
  'I was but seven year auld
    When my mither she did die;
  My father married the ae warst woman
    The warld did ever see.

  2.
  'For she has made me the laily worm,
    That lies at the fit o' the tree,
  An' my sister Masery she's made
    The machrel of the sea.

  3.
  'An' every Saturday at noon
    The machrel comes to me,
  An' she takes my laily head
    An' lays it on her knee,
  She kaims it wi' a siller kaim,
    An' washes 't in the sea.

  4.
  'Seven knights hae I slain,
    Sin I lay at the fit of the tree,
  An' ye war na my ain father,
    The eight ane ye should be.'

  5.
  'Sing on your song, ye laily worm,
    That ye did sing to me:'
  'I never sung that song but what
    I would sing it to thee.

  6.
  'I was but seven year auld,
    When my mither she did die;
  My father married the ae warst woman
    The warld did ever see.

  7.
  'For she changed me to the laily worm,
    That lies at the fit o' the tree,
  And my sister Masery
    To the machrel of the sea.

  8.
  'And every Saturday at noon
    The machrel comes to me,
  An' she takes my laily head
    An' lays it on her knee,
  An' kames it wi' a siller kame,
    An' washes it i' the sea.

  9.
  'Seven knights hae I slain
    Sin I lay at the fit o' the tree;
  An' ye war na my ain father,
    The eighth ane ye shoud be.'

  10.
  He sent for his lady,
    As fast as send could he:
  'Whar is my son that ye sent frae me,
    And my daughter, Lady Masery?'

  11.
  'Your son is at our king's court,
    Serving for meat an' fee,
  An' your daughter's at our queen's court,
    ...   ...   ...'

  12.
  'Ye lie, ye ill woman,
    Sae loud as I hear ye lie;
  My son's the laily worm,
    That lies at the fit o' the tree,
  And my daughter, Lady Masery,
    Is the machrel of the sea!'

  13.
  She has tane a siller wan',
    An' gi'en him strokes three,
  And he has started up the bravest knight
    That ever your eyes did see.

  14.
  She has ta'en a small horn,
    An' loud an' shrill blew she,
  An' a' the fish came her untill
    But the proud machrel of the sea:
  'Ye shapeit me ance an unseemly shape,
    An' ye's never mare shape me.'

  15.
  He has sent to the wood
    For whins and for hawthorn,
  An' he has ta'en that gay lady,
    An' there he did her burn.


    [Annotation:
    2.1 etc.: 'laily' = laidly, loathly.]




KEMP OWYNE


+The Text+ is that given (nearly _literatim_) by Buchan and Motherwell,
and also in the MSS. of the latter.


+The Story.+--This adventure of Owyne (Owain, 'the King's son Urien,'
Ywaine, etc.), with the subsequent transformation, has a parallel in an
Icelandic saga. Rehabilitation in human shape by means of a kiss is a
common tale in the Scandinavian area; occasionally three kisses are
necessary.

A similar ballad, now lost, but re-written by the contributor, from
scraps of recitation by an old woman in Berwickshire, localises the
story of the fire-drake ('the laidly worm') near Bamborough in
Northumberland; and Kinloch said that the term 'Childe o' Wane' was
still applied by disconsolate damsels of Bamborough to any youth who
champions them. However, Mr. R. W. Clark of Bamborough, who has kindly
made inquiries for me, could find no survival of this use.

The ballad is also called 'Kempion.'


KEMP OWYNE

  1.
  Her mother died when she was young,
    Which gave her cause to make great moan;
  Her father married the warst woman
    That ever lived in Christendom.

  2.
  She served her with foot and hand,
    In every thing that she could dee,
  Till once, in an unlucky time,
    She threw her in ower Craigy's sea.

  3.
  Says, 'Lie you there, dove Isabel,
    And all my sorrows lie with thee;
  Till Kemp Owyne come ower the sea,
    And borrow you with kisses three,
  Let all the warld do what they will,
    Oh borrowed shall you never be!'

  4.
  Her breath grew strang, her hair grew lang,
    And twisted thrice about the tree,
  And all the people, far and near,
    Thought that a savage beast was she.

  5.
  These news did come to Kemp Owyne,
    Where he lived, far beyond the sea;
  He hasted him to Craigy's sea,
    And on the savage beast look'd he.

  6.
  Her breath was strang, her hair was lang,
    And twisted was about the tree,
  And with a swing she came about:
    'Come to Craigy's sea, and kiss with me.

  7.
  'Here is a royal belt,' she cried,
    'That I have found in the green sea;
  And while your body it is on,
    Drawn shall your blood never be;
  But if you touch me, tail or fin,
    I vow my belt your death shall be.'

  8.
  He stepped in, gave her a kiss,
    The royal belt he brought him wi';
  Her breath was strang, her hair was lang,
    And twisted twice about the tree,
  And with a swing she came about:
    'Come to Craigy's sea, and kiss with me.

  9.
  'Here is a royal ring,' she said,
    'That I have found in the green sea;
  And while your finger it is on,
    Drawn shall your blood never be;
  But if you touch me, tail or fin,
    I swear my ring your death shall be.'

  10.
  He stepped in, gave her a kiss,
    The royal ring he brought him wi';
  Her breath was strang, her hair was lang,
    And twisted ance about the tree,
  And with a swing she came about:
    'Come to Craigy's sea, and kiss with me.

  11.
  'Here is a royal brand,' she said,
    'That I have found in the green sea;
  And while your body it is on,
    Drawn shall your blood never be;
  But if you touch me, tail or fin,
    I swear my brand your death shall be.'

  12.
  He stepped in, gave her a kiss,
    The royal brand he brought him wi';
  Her breath was sweet, her hair grew short,
    And twisted nane about the tree,
  And smilingly she came about,
    As fair a woman as fair could be.


    [Annotations:
    3.3: 'Kemp' = champion, knight. Cp. 'Childe' in _Childe Maurice_,
      etc.
    3.4: 'borrow,' ransom.]




WILLIE'S LADY


+The Text+ is from the lost Fraser-Tytler-Brown MS., this ballad luckily
having been transcribed before the MS. disappeared. Mrs. Brown recited
another and a fuller version to Jamieson.


+The Story.+--Willie's mother, a witch, displeased at her son's choice,
maliciously arrests by witchcraft the birth of Willie's son. Willie's
travailing wife sends him again and again to bribe the witch, who
refuses cup, steed, and girdle. Here our version makes such abrupt
transitions, that it will be well to explain what takes place. The Belly
Blind or Billie Blin (see _Young Bekie_, First Series, pp. 6, 7) advises
Willie to make a sham baby of wax, and invite his witch-mother to the
christening. Willie does so (in stanzas lost between our 33 and 34); the
witch, believing the wax-baby to be flesh and blood, betrays all her
craft by asking who has loosed the knots, ta'en out the kaims, ta'en
down the woodbine, etc., these being the magic rites by which she has
suspended birth. Willie instantly looses the knots and takes out the
kaims, and his wife presents him with a bonny young son.

The story is common in Danish ballads, and occasional in Swedish. In the
classics, Juno (Hera) on two occasions delayed childbirth and cheated
Ilithyia, the sufferers being Latona and Alcmene. But the latest version
of the story is said to have occurred in Arran in the nineteenth
century. A young man, forsaking his sweetheart, married another maiden,
who when her time came suffered exceedingly. A packman who chanced to be
passing heard the tale and suspected the cause. Going to the discarded
sweetheart, he told her that her rival had given birth to a fine child;
thereupon she sprang up, pulled a large nail out of the beam, and called
to her mother, 'Muckle good your craft has done!' The labouring wife was
delivered forthwith. (See _The Folklore Record_, vol. ii. p. 117.)


WILLIE'S LADY

  1.
  Willie has taen him o'er the fame,
  He's woo'd a wife and brought her hame.

  2.
  He's woo'd her for her yellow hair,
  But his mother wrought her mickle care,

  3.
  And mickle dolour gard her dree,
  For lighter she can never be.

  4.
  But in her bower she sits wi' pain,
  And Willie mourns o'er her in vain.

  5.
  And to his mother he has gone,
  That vile rank witch of vilest kind.

  6.
  He says: 'My ladie has a cup
  Wi' gowd and silver set about.

  7.
  'This goodlie gift shall be your ain,
  And let her be lighter o' her young bairn.'

  8.
  'Of her young bairn she'll ne'er be lighter,
  Nor in her bower to shine the brighter.

  9.
  'But she shall die and turn to clay,
  And you shall wed another may.'

  10.
  'Another may I'll never wed,
  Another may I'll ne'er bring home.'

  11.
  But sighing says that weary wight,
  'I wish my life were at an end.'

  12.
  'Ye doe [ye] unto your mother again,
  That vile rank witch of vilest kind.

  13.
  'And say your ladie has a steed,
  The like o' 'm's no in the lands of Leed.

  14.
  'For he's golden shod before,
  And he's golden shod behind.

  15.
  'And at ilka tet of that horse's main
  There's a golden chess and a bell ringing.

  16.
  'This goodlie gift shall be your ain,
  And let me be lighter of my young bairn.'

  17.
  'O' her young bairn she'll ne'er be lighter,
  Nor in her bower to shine the brighter.

  18.
  'But she shall die and turn to clay,
  And ye shall wed another may.'

  19.
  'Another may I'll never wed,
  Another may I'll neer bring hame.'

  20.
  But sighing said that weary wight,
  'I wish my life were at an end.'

  21.
  'Ye doe [ye] unto your mother again,
  That vile rank witch of vilest kind.

  22.
  'And say your ladie has a girdle,
  It's red gowd unto the middle.

  23.
  'And ay at every silver hem
  Hangs fifty silver bells and ten.

  24.
  'That goodlie gift sall be her ain,
  And let me be lighter of my young bairn.'

  25.
  'O' her young bairn she's ne'er be lighter,
  Nor in her bower to shine the brighter.

  26.
  'But she shall die and turn to clay,
  And you shall wed another may.'

  27.
  'Another may I'll never wed,
  Another may I'll ne'er bring hame.'

  28.
  But sighing says that weary wight,
  'I wish my life were at an end.'

  29.
  Then out and spake the Belly Blind;
  He spake aye in good time.

  30.
  'Ye doe ye to the market place,
  And there ye buy a loaf o' wax.

  31.
  'Ye shape it bairn and bairnly like,
  And in twa glassen een ye pit;

  32.
  'And bid her come to your boy's christening;
  Then notice weel what she shall do.

  33.
  'And do you stand a little forebye,
  And listen weel what she shall say.'

    ***   ***   ***

  34.
  'O wha has loosed the nine witch knots
  That was amo' that ladie's locks?

  35.
  'And wha has taen out the kaims of care
  That hangs amo' that ladie's hair?

  36.
  'And wha's taen down the bush o' woodbine
  That hang atween her bower and mine?

  37.
  'And wha has kill'd the master kid
  That ran beneath that ladie's bed?

  38.
  'And wha has loosed her left-foot shee,
  And lotten that lady lighter be?'

  39.
  O Willie has loosed the nine witch knots
  That was amo' that ladie's locks.

  40.
  And Willie's taen out the kaims o' care
  That hang amo' that ladie's hair.

  41.
  And Willie's taen down the bush o' woodbine
  That hang atween her bower and thine.

  42.
  And Willie has killed the master kid
  That ran beneath that ladie's bed.

  43.
  And Willie has loosed her left-foot shee,
  And letten his ladie lighter be.

  44.
  And now he's gotten a bonny young son,
  And mickle grace be him upon.


    [Annotations:
    19: 'I'll' is 'I' in both lines in the MS.
    24.1: 'sall' is Scott's emendation for _has_ in the MS.]




THE WEE WEE MAN


+The Text+ is that of Herd's MS. and his _Scots Songs_. Other versions
vary very slightly, and this is the oldest of them.

There is a fourteenth-century MS. (in the Cotton collection) containing
a poem not unlike _The Wee Wee Man_; but there is no justification in
deriving the ballad from the poem, which may be found in Ritson's
_Ancient Songs_ (1829), i. p. 40.

Scott incorporates the story with _The Young Tamlane_.


THE WEE WEE MAN

  1.
  As I was wa'king all alone,
    Between a water and a wa',
  And there I spy'd a wee wee man,
    And he was the least that ere I saw.

  2.
  His legs were scarce a shathmont's length,
    And thick and thimber was his thigh;
  Between his brows there was a span,
    And between his shoulders there was three.

  3.
  He took up a meikle stane,
    And he flang 't as far as I could see;
  Though I had been a Wallace wight,
    I couldna liften't to my knee.

  4.
  'O wee wee man, but thou be strang!
    O tell me where thy dwelling be?'
  'My dwelling's down at yon bonny bower;
    O will you go with me and see?'

  5.
  On we lap, and awa' we rade,
    Till we came to yon bonny green;
  We lighted down for to bait our horse,
    And out there came a lady fine.

  6.
  Four and twenty at her back,
    And they were a' clad out in green;
  Though the King of Scotland had been there,
    The warst o' them might hae been his queen.

  7.
  On we lap, and awa' we rade,
    Till we came to yon bonny ha',
  Whare the roof was o' the beaten gould,
    And the floor was o' the cristal a'.

  8.
  When we came to the stair-foot,
    Ladies were dancing, jimp and sma',
  But in the twinkling of an eye,
    My wee wee man was clean awa'.


    [Annotations:
    1.4: 'ere,' _i.e._ e'er.
    2.1: 'shathmont,' a span.
    2.2: 'thimber,' gross.]




COSPATRICK


+The Text+ is that of Scott's _Minstrelsy_ (1802). It was 'taken down
from the recitation of a lady' (his mother's sister, Miss Christian
Rutherford), and collated with a copy in the Tytler-Brown MS. The ballad
is also called _Gil Brenton_, _Lord Dingwall_, _Bangwell_, _Bengwill_,
or _Brangwill_, _Bothwell_, etc.


+The Story+ is a great favourite, not only in Scandinavian ballads, but
also in all northern literature. The magical agency of bed, blankets,
sheets, and sword, is elsewhere extended to a chair, a stepping-stone by
the bedside (see the _Boy and the Mantle_, First Series, p. 119), or the
Billie Blin (see _Young Bekie_, First Series, pp. 6, 7, and _Willie's
Lady_, p. 19). The Norwegian tale of Aase and the Prince is known to
English readers in Dasent's _Annie the Goosegirl_. The Prince is
possessed of a stepping-stone by his bedside, which answers his question
night and morning, and enables him to detect the supposititious bride.
See also Jamieson's translation of _Ingefred and Gudrunè_, in
_Illustrations of Northern Antiquities_, p. 340.


COSPATRICK

  1.
  Cospatrick has sent o'er the faem,
  Cospatrick brought his ladye hame.

  2.
  And fourscore ships have come her wi',
  The ladye by the grenewood tree.

  3.
  There were twal' and twal' wi' baken bread,
  And twal' and twal' wi' gowd sae reid:

  4.
  And twal' and twal' wi' bouted flour,
  And twal' and twal' wi' the paramour.

  5.
  Sweet Willy was a widow's son,
  And at her stirrup he did run.

  6.
  And she was clad in the finest pall,
  But aye she let the tears down fall.

  7.
  'O is your saddle set awrye?
  Or rides your steed for you owre high?

  8.
  'Or are you mourning in your tide
  That you suld be Cospatrick's bride?'

  9.
  'I am not mourning at this tide
  That I suld be Cospatrick's bride;

  10.
  'But I am sorrowing in my mood
  That I suld leave my mother good.

  11.
  'But, gentle boy, come tell to me,
  What is the custom of thy countrye?'

  12.
  'The custom thereof, my dame,' he says,
  'Will ill a gentle laydye please.

  13.
  'Seven king's daughters has our lord wedded,
  And seven king's daughters has our lord bedded;

  14.
  'But he's cutted their breasts frae their breast-bane,
  And sent them mourning hame again.

  15.
  'Yet, gin you're sure that you're a maid,
  Ye may gae safely to his bed;

  16.
  'But gif o' that ye be na sure,
  Then hire some damsell o' your bour.'

  17.
  The ladye's call'd her bour-maiden,
  That waiting was into her train.

  18.
  'Five thousand merks I will gie thee,
  To sleep this night with my lord for me.'

  19.
  When bells were rung, and mass was sayne,
  And a' men unto bed were gane,

  20.
  Cospatrick and the bonny maid,
  Into ae chamber they were laid.

  21.
  'Now speak to me, blankets, and speak to me, bed,
  And speak, thou sheet, inchanted web;

  22.
  'And speak up, my bonny brown sword, that winna lie,
  Is this a true maiden that lies by me?'

  23.
  'It is not a maid that you hae wedded,
  But it is a maid that you hae bedded;

  24.
  'It is a liel maiden that lies by thee,
  But not the maiden that it should be.'

  25.
  O wrathfully he left the bed,
  And wrathfully his claiths on did;

  26.
  And he has taen him thro' the ha',
  And on his mother he did ca'.

  27.
  'I am the most unhappy man,
  That ever was in Christen land!

  28.
  'I courted a maiden, meik and mild,
  And I hae gotten naething but a woman wi' child.'

  29.
  'O stay, my son, into this ha',
  And sport ye wi' your merrymen a';

  30.
  'And I will to the secret bour,
  To see how it fares wi' your paramour.'

  31.
  The carline she was stark and sture,
  She aff the hinges dang the dure.

  32.
  'O is your bairn to laird or loun?
  Or is it to your father's groom?'

  33.
  'O hear me, mother, on my knee,
  Till my sad story I tell to thee:

  34.
  'O we were sisters, sisters seven,
  We were the fairest under heaven.

  35.
  'It fell on a summer's afternoon,
  When a' our toilsome task was done,

  36.
  'We cast the kavils us amang,
  To see which suld to the grene-wood gang.

  37.
  'Ohon! alas, for I was youngest,
  And aye my wierd it was the hardest!

  38.
  'The kavil it on me did fa',
  Whilk was the cause of a' my woe.

  39.
  'For to the grene-wood I maun gae,
  To pu' the red rose and the slae;

  40.
  'To pu' the red rose and the thyme,
  To deck my mother's bour and mine.

  41.
  'I hadna pu'd a flower but ane,
  When by there came a gallant hende,

  42.
  'Wi' high-coll'd hose and laigh-coll'd shoon,
  And he seem'd to be some king's son.

  43.
  'And be I maid, or be I nae,
  He kept me there till the close o' day.

  44.
  'And be I maid, or be I nane,
  He kept me there till the day was done.

  45.
  'He gae me a lock o' his yellow hair,
  And bade me keep it ever mair.

  46.
  'He gae me a carknet o' bonny beads,
  And bade me keep it against my needs.

  47.
  'He gae to me a gay gold ring,
  And bade me keep it abune a' thing.'

  48.
  'What did ye wi' the tokens rare
  That ye gat frae that gallant there?'

  49.
  'O bring that coffer unto me,
  And a' the tokens ye sall see.'

  50.
  'Now stay, daughter, your bour within,
  While I gae parley wi' my son.'

  51.
  O she has taen her thro' the ha',
  And on her son began to ca':

  52.
  'What did you wi' the bonny beads,
  I bade ye keep against your needs?

  53.
  'What did you wi' the gay gold ring,
  I bade you keep abune a' thing?'

  54.
  'I gae them to a ladye gay,
  I met in grene-wood on a day.

  55.
  'But I wad gie a' my halls and tours,
  I had that ladye within my bours;

  56.
  'But I wad gie my very life,
  I had that ladye to my wife.'

  57.
  'Now keep, my son, your ha's and tours;
  Ye have that bright burd in your bours;

  58.
  'And keep, my son, your very life;
  Ye have that ladye to your wife.'

  59.
  Now, or a month was come and gane,
  The ladye bore a bonny son;

  60.
  And 'twas weel written on his breast-bane,
  'Cospatrick is my father's name.'

  61.
  'O rowe my ladye in satin and silk,
  And wash my son in the morning milk.'


    [Annotations:
    18.1: A mark was two-thirds of a pound.
    31.1: 'stark and sture,' sturdy and strong.
    36.1: 'kavils' = kevels, lots.
    37.2: 'wierd,' fate.
    41.2: 'hende' (? = heynde, person).
    42.1: 'high-coll'd ... laigh-coll'd,' high-cut ... low-cut.
    46.1: 'carknet,' necklace.
    57.2: 'burd,' maiden.
    61.1: 'rowe,' roll, wrap.]




YOUNG AKIN


+The Text+ is taken from Buchan's _Ballads of the North of Scotland_,
and, like nearly all Buchan's versions, exhibits traces of vulgar
remoulding. This ballad in particular has lost much of the original
features. Kinloch called his version _Hynde Etin_, Allingham his
compilation _Etin the Forester_.


+The Story+ is given in a far finer style in romantic Scandinavian
ballads. Prior translated two of them, _The Maid and the Dwarf-King_,
and _Agnes and the Merman_, both Danish. The Norse ballads on this
subject, which may still be heard sung, are exceptionally beautiful.
Child says, 'They should make an Englishman's heart wring for his loss.'

In the present version we may with some confidence attribute to Buchan
the stanzas from 48 to the end, as well as 15 and 16. The preference is
given to Buchan's text merely because it retains features lost in
Kinloch's version.


YOUNG AKIN

  1.
  Lady Margaret sits in her bower door,
    Sewing at her silken seam;
  She heard a note in Elmond's wood,
    And wish'd she there had been.

  2.
  She loot the seam fa' frae her side,
    And the needle to her tae,
  And she is on to Elmond-wood
    As fast as she coud gae.

  3.
  She hadna pu'd a nut, a nut,
    Nor broken a branch but ane,
  Till by it came a young hind chiel,
    Says, 'Lady, lat alane.

  4.
  'O why pu' ye the nut, the nut,
    Or why brake ye the tree?
  For I am forester o' this wood:
    Ye shoud spier leave at me.'

  5.
  'I'll ask leave at no living man,
    Nor yet will I at thee;
  My father is king o'er a' this realm,
    This wood belongs to me.'

  6.
  She hadna pu'd a nut, a nut,
    Nor broken a branch but three,
  Till by it came him Young Akin,
    And gard her lat them be.

  7.
  The highest tree in Elmond's wood,
    He's pu'd it by the reet,
  And he has built for her a bower,
    Near by a hallow seat.

  8.
  He's built a bower, made it secure
    Wi' carbuncle and stane;
  Tho' travellers were never sae nigh,
    Appearance it had nane.

  9.
  He's kept her there in Elmond's wood
    For six lang years and one,
  Till six pretty sons to him she bear,
    And the seventh she's brought home.

  10.
  It fell ance upon a day,
    This guid lord went from home,
  And he is to the hunting gane,
    Took wi' him his eldest son.

  11.
  And when they were on a guid way,
    Wi' slowly pace did walk,
  The boy's heart being something wae,
    He thus began to talk.

  12.
  'A question I woud ask, father,
    Gin ye woudna angry be;'
  'Say on, say on, my bonny boy,
    Ye'se nae be quarrell'd by me.'

  13.
  'I see my mither's cheeks aye weet,
    I never can see them dry;
  And I wonder what aileth my mither,
    To mourn continually.'

  14.
  'Your mither was a king's daughter,
    Sprung frae a high degree,
  And she might hae wed some worthy prince
    Had she nae been stown by me.

  15.
  'I was her father's cupbearer,
    Just at that fatal time;
  I catch'd her on a misty night,
    When summer was in prime.

  16.
  'My luve to her was most sincere,
    Her luve was great for me,
  But when she hardships doth endure,
    Her folly she does see.'

  17.
  'I'll shoot the buntin' o' the bush,
    The linnet o' the tree,
  And bring them to my dear mither,
    See if she'll merrier be.'

  18.
  It fell upo' another day,
    This guid lord he thought lang,
  And he is to the hunting gane,
    Took wi' him his dog and gun.

  19.
  Wi' bow and arrow by his side,
    He's aff, single, alane,
  And left his seven children to stay
  