Note: Images of the original pages are available through
      Internet Archive. See
      https://archive.org/details/guestoneeyed00gunniala


Transcriber’s note:

      Text enclosed by underscores is in italics (_italics_).





GUEST THE ONE-EYED


      *      *      *      *      *      *

_BY THE SAME AUTHOR_

THE SWORN BROTHERS


A tale of the early days of Iceland by the most noted of living
Icelandic novelists. “To read it is like being struck in the face on a
sultry day with a breeze fresh from the glaciated mountains of the
Viking North.”

—_The Bookman._

“Gunnarsson has made his characters so genuine, so red-blooded and so
masculine that they stand out like living men.”

—_News-Tribune, Detroit._

_NEW YORK: ALFRED A. KNOPF_

      *      *      *      *      *      *


GUEST THE ONE-EYED

Translated from the Danish of

GUNNAR GUNNARSSON

by W. W. Worster


[Illustration]


New York
Alfred · A · Knopf
1922

Copyright, 1915, by Gunnar Gunnarsson

Copyright, 1922, by
Alfred A. Knopf, Inc.

[Original title: AF BORGSLÆGTENS HISTORIE]

Set up and printed by the Vail-Ballou Co., Binghamton, N. Y.
Paper furnished by W. F. Etherington & Co., New York, N. Y.
Bound by the H. Wolff Estate, New York, N. Y.

Manufactured in the United States of America

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                CONTENTS


                                 BOOK I

                       ORMARR ØRLYGSSON         9


                                BOOK II

                       THE DANISH LADY AT HOF 107


                                BOOK III

                       GUEST THE ONE-EYED     189


                                BOOK IV

                       THE YOUNG EAGLE        273




                                 BOOK I
                            ORMARR ØRLYGSSON




                               CHAPTER I


Snow, snow, snow!

Below and above—here, there, and everywhere! Up to his knees in snow,
Pall à Seyru struggled across the wind-swept heights. The snow whirled
down in great downy flakes, making it impossible to see more than a few
yards ahead. Stooping, with heavy, weary steps, he tramped on, an empty
sack slung across his shoulders.

He had come from the trading station, and was on his way home to his own
hut in the mountains; the store-keeper had refused to grant him further
credit, and in consequence, he had chosen to return by this lonely track
across the hills, where he was sure of meeting no one on his way. It was
hard to come home at Christmas-time with empty hands to empty pots and
hungry mouths.

His only comfort was the snow. It fell so thickly as to shut out all
around, and seemed to numb even the poor peasant’s despair within the
dismal prison of his mind.

Now and again he heard a sound—the whir and cackle of ptarmigan flying
overhead.

Suddenly a gust of wind sent the snow flying over the ground.
Another—and then gust followed gust, growing at last to a veritable
hurricane, that swept the very snow-clouds from the sky. And as if by
magic, a vast plain of snow lay open to his eyes.

All Hofsfjordur was suddenly visible. Pall turned, and saw the last of
the clouds sweep down into the dark blue-green of the sea. To the
south-east, the peaks of the Hof Mountains rose out of the water, and
over the eastern landscape towered a long range of rocky mountains that
gradually merged into the great south-western plateau. His eye rested
for a moment on the vicarage farm of Hof—a few straggling buildings
clinging to the mountain-side, among which the black church itself
loomed out, right at the mouth of the fjord. The houses of the trading
station he could not see; they lay beyond, on the northern shore of the
fjord, safely sheltered behind the rocky walls of the islets that
offered such fine harbourage—to any ship that managed to reach so far.

The parish itself lay between him and the Hof Mountains. A valley two
miles farther up was divided into two narrow dales by the Borgasfjall, a
steep and rocky height. The rivulets from the two valleys—now but
streaks of smooth ice—met lower down, making part of the valley into a
peninsula. The southern stream was named Hofsa, and its valley
Hofsardalur; the northernmost Borgara, and its valley Borgardalur; but
the rivulets, from their confluence to the outflow into Hofsfjordur,
still went by the name of Borgara, and the broad valley was called
Borgardalur.

To the north, on the farther side of a narrow valley, likewise belonging
to the parish, were the faint outlines of broad, slowly rising hills—the
Dark Mountains. The ridge where Pall now stood was Borgarhals, and ran
for a long way between Borgardalur and Nordurdalen, in the heart of the
mountains, leading to the little glen where his cottage lay, close to a
brook, and not far from the lake. There were trout in the water there,
to be taken by net in summer, and in winter by fishing with lines
through holes in the ice. Wild geese, swans, and ducks were there in
plenty, from early spring to late autumn.

But Pall’s thoughts had wandered far from all this, settling, as did his
glance, on a row of stately gables that rose above a low hill in the
centre of the peninsula, formed by the waters of Borgara and Hofsa.

From three of the chimneys a kindly smoke ascended. The storm had
abated, and folk were beginning to move about here and there among the
outbuildings round the large walled farmyard. Already flocks of sheep
were on their way to the winter pasture at the foot of the hills, where
some dwarfed growth was still to be found.

This was Borg, the home of Ørlygur the Rich, as he was called. It was by
no means uncommon for folk to speak of him as “the King,” for he ruled
over scores of servants, and owned hundreds of cattle and horses and
thousands of sheep.

Suddenly Pall’s cheeks flushed with a happy thought. It had crossed his
mind that he might call at Borg. All knew that Ørlygur the Rich never
sent a poor man empty away. But then he realized that today was not the
first time the thought had come to him. No, better to give it up; he had
turned for help to Borg too many times before; he could not well ask
again.

With bowed head, and face grey as before, he dragged himself along the
almost impassable track; he was exhausted; his limbs seemed heavy as if
in chains.

From early morning to about ten o’clock, while the storm raged, the farm
hands and servants of Borg gathered in the women’s hall upstairs. The
men had come from their quarters, and sat about on the beds waiting for
the storm to abate before starting out to their work. The cowman alone
was forced to brave the elements and tend his cattle.

Ørlygur had opened the door to his own room. He sat with his
two-year-old son Ketill on his knees, and talked quietly with his men,
exchanging views, or giving them advice about the work of the place. He
always treated them as his equals. The men sat with their
breakfast-plates on their knees, eating as they talked. Some of the
womenfolk went to and fro with food or heavy outdoor clothing; others
were darning socks or mending shoes.

Ormarr, who was nearing his fourteenth year, sat in his father’s room,
on the edge of the bed, facing Ørlygur. It was in his mind that things
were beginning to be like they had been before his mother’s death, two
years ago. He sat with his hands on his knees, swinging his legs by way
of accompaniment to his thoughts.

Never before had he missed his mother so sorely as this morning, when
every one else seemed to have forgotten her; never before had he felt
her loss so keenly. He sighed, checked the swinging of his legs, and sat
motionless for a while. Tears rose to his eyes. He felt he must go out,
or he would be crying openly in a minute, and disturb the comfort of the
rest. For a moment he sat pondering where to go, then he remembered that
the cowman would by now have finished work in the shed, and taking down
an old violin from a rack, he left the room.

Reaching the cowshed, he sat down in his accustomed place, on a board
between two empty chests, and commenced tuning his instrument. It was an
old thing that had been in the family for generations, but no one could
remember having heard it played. Then, seven years before, Ormarr had
been taught the rudiments of music by a wandering fiddler, an
adventurous soul, who tramped the country with his fiddle slung over his
shoulder in a calfskin bag. Since then, Ormarr had given all his spare
time to the music.

His father had marked with grief how this one interest had gradually
swallowed up all else; the boy cared nothing for the management of the
estate, or indeed for any other work. Possibly it was this which had led
Ørlygur, in spite of the doctor’s advice, to wish for another son. And
his wife had sacrificed her life in giving him what he wished.

Hard and self-willed as he was in many ways, Ørlygur had yet a profound
belief in the right of every human being to determine his own life, to
follow his own nature and develop his gifts as long as it involved no
actual harm to others. And he made no attempt to coerce the boy; Ormarr
had his way.

                  *       *       *       *       *

About ten o’clock, when the snow had ceased, Ormarr slung his gun across
his shoulder and walked off toward Borgarhals to shoot ptarmigan.

On the way, he met Einar à Gili, a troublesome fellow, who, in defiance
of the general feeling, had so little respect for the uncrowned king of
Borg that he had several times thrashed his son Ormarr without the
slightest provocation. It was the more unpardonable, since Einar was
about ten years older, and strong as a giant. And now, at sight of him,
Ormarr’s fingers fumbled in passionate helplessness at the trigger of
his gun.

Einar hailed him, to all appearance innocent as could be. “Hey, Ormarr,
out shooting? Let’s go together?”

Ormarr had no desire to go out shooting with Einar, but was curious to
know why the other had suggested it.

“Then we can see who’s the best shot.”

This was irresistible. Einar was a proverbially bad shot with a gun, and
Ormarr knew it. He made no protest, and they went on together.

Every time he fired, Ormarr brought down two or three birds. Einar got
at the most one bird at a shot, and often sent the birds fluttering away
with broken wings.

Nevertheless, Einar picked up all the birds that fell, and stuffed them
into his own bag. Ormarr demanded his share.

“Oh, you’ve no bag, and there’s no sense wasting time tying your birds
together at every shot. Wait till we’ve done.”

Ormarr had his suspicions, but said nothing.

After a while they came to a good-sized rock, with two paths round.
Ormarr knew that the paths to the south was the longer.

“Let’s go round and meet on the other side. I’ll go this way,” he said,
taking the northern path. And Einar agreed.

When they met, neither had any more birds to show.

“But you fired, I heard you,” said Einar.

“I missed,” said Ormarr shortly. Einar laughed, but he took no notice.

“Look, there’s one sitting on that rock,” said Ormarr suddenly, pointing
to a boulder some hundred yards away. “I’ll take him.”

“No hurry,” said Einar; “I’ll bag that one myself. We needn’t go on any
longer—I’m going home now.”

“How many have we got?”

“Oh, twenty.”

“Good, then give me mine.”

“Ah, yes—next time we meet! I’m off. My love to the cattle at home.”

Somewhat to his disappointment, Ormarr did not seem to be greatly
annoyed, but merely walked off, calling quietly over his shoulder: “Mind
you don’t miss that bird, Mr. Clever-with-your-gun.”

Einar turned round angrily. “Don’t shout like that—you’ll scare it away.
That’s my twenty-first.”

“All right. It’s too frightened of you to move. Go and see.”

Einar took careful aim—his hand shook a little, but only because he was
inwardly chuckling over the trick he had played Ormarr, and the thought
of telling what he had done. Though, indeed, he might get little credit
for it all; people were rather apt to side with the lordly folk from
Borg. Still, it was good to have fooled that brat Ormarr again.

The bird was sitting close on the rock. Einar fired, and, raising his
gun, saw that the bird was still in the same position. Seeing no
feathers fly, he thought he must have missed, and loaded again. Then
creeping cautiously forward, he rested his gun on a stone, and fired
again. The ptarmigan did not move. Einar felt sure his shot must have
taken effect. He went right up to it. The bird was dead enough, but what
was more, it was cold. And lifting it, he saw a piece of paper tied to
one of its legs, with a few words in pencil. “Clever shot, aren’t you?
Thanks for a pleasant day’s sport.—Ormarr.”

“Curse the little jackanapes!”

Einar never told any one after all how he had scored off Ormarr that
day.

                  *       *       *       *       *

Ormarr hurried along up hill and down, firing and reloading rapidly,
scarcely seeming to take aim at all, but never missing his bird. His
narrow sunburnt face was flushed with exertion, and drops of
perspiration trickled down from his forehead. His eyes searched eagerly
about for game, and in a very short time he had a bag of twenty-seven.
Then suddenly, coming round the corner of a rock, he stood face to face
with Pall à Seyru. Pall tried to avoid him, but Ormarr called him back.
He sat down, wiped the perspiration from his face, and smiled as Pall
came up.

“Puh—I’m warm enough, for all it’s fifteen degrees of frost. You look
half frozen.”

Pall muttered something, and tried to hide his empty sack, which had the
effect of drawing Ormarr’s attention to it.

“What’s that—going back home with an empty bag? Won’t Bjarni let you
have things any more?”

“I’m in debt there already. And I couldn’t promise to pay before next
autumn.”

“But at Christmas-time—and you’re not a rich man.”

“That makes but little difference in his books.”

“Ho—who says that—you?”

“’Twas Bjarni said so.”

“And you had to go and ask him—beg of him—like that?”

“Our cow didn’t calve, and we’ve no milk. And there’s no food in the
place beyond.”

“H’m. What were you going this way round for? ’Tisn’t any short way
home.”

“I didn’t want to meet anyone.”

“And going back empty-handed? Why didn’t you come to us?”

“I’ve been a burden to many this long time—to your folk more than any.
And I’ll not ask for help from the parish.”

Something in the man’s face made Ormarr catch his breath. The blood left
his cheeks, and in a hushed voice he asked:

“You mean—you’d....”

Pall nodded. “Yes. There’s times when it seems better than living on
this way.”

Ormarr sprang to his feet.

“Pall ... here, take these birds—just from me. And come home and talk to
father. You must. He’ll be just as glad to do anything as you could be
for it. As for Bjarni, he’s a cur. You can tell him so from me next time
you see him.”

Pall was silenced, and tears rose to his eyes. Ormarr understood, and
said no more. They divided the birds into two lots, though Ormarr would
gladly have carried the whole, and in silence they started off down the
slope.

                  *       *       *       *       *

Ormarr slept in a bed next to his father’s. It had been his mother’s
bed. When the light was put out that night, Ormarr had not yet found
courage to tell what he had been thinking of since his meeting with Pall
that day. Nor did he know what had passed between his father and Pall.

Half an hour later, perceiving that his father was still awake, he
managed to whisper, softly and unsteadily:

“Father!”

It was as if Ørlygur had been waiting for this. He rose, and seated
himself at the boy’s bedside.

“’Twas well you met Pall this morning, lad. His wife and two little
children were waiting for him to come home.”

The words gave Ormarr the courage he had lacked.

“Father, may I give him Blesa? His cow won’t calve for six weeks, and
they’ve no milk.”

“I’ve promised Pall to send him Skjalda, and a few loads of hay the
first fine day the roads are passable. And I am going to take little
Gudrun to live here—they’ve enough to do as it is.”

Ormarr’s heart was full of thankfulness to his father for his kindness
to Pall. But he was shy of speaking; words might say less than he meant.
And there must be no misunderstanding between his father and
himself—this thought was always in Ormarr’s mind, for he loved his
father deeply. Now in the darkness of the room, he could hardly
distinguish his features, but in his mind’s eye he saw him clearly,
sitting there on the bedside. He knew every line in the calm, composed
face, finely framed in the dark hair and brown beard. Often he had been
told that there was not a handsomer man to be found than his father. He
had the physique of an athlete, and Ormarr knew his every movement and
attitude. He strove now to breathe all his love towards the loved
figure, vaguely seen in reality, yet clear as ever to his mind. He felt
that his father could not fail to perceive the mute expression of his
loving gratitude.

For a while both were silent. Then Ørlygur rose, and smoothing his son’s
hair, he said:

“You know, Ormarr, that all I possess will in time belong to you and
your brother. Then you will be able to give away more than trifles. At
present, you have little to use in charity, but what you have, you may
do with as you please. Remember that it is our duty to help those who
are poorer wherever we can. And when you hear of any one that needs a
helping hand, always come to me. Wealth is not lost by charity. And now
good-night—it is time we were asleep.”

He went back to his bed, and a moment after, spoke again.

“Ormarr, you remember how generous your mother always was. You seem to
grow more like her every day. I think she would have been very happy
tonight.”

Ormarr burst into tears, hiding his face in the pillow to make no sound.
And after a little while, he fell asleep.

When he awoke next morning, he felt for the first time since his
mother’s death as if she were invisibly present among them—as a link
between his father and himself.

And he was filled with a proud sense of having entered into a secret
covenant with his father; it gave him a feeling of manhood, of
responsibility.




                               CHAPTER II


Bjarni Jonsson, the trader, and Daniel Sveisson, the parish priest,—Sera
Daniel, as he was called,—sat drinking in Bjarni Jonsson’s front
parlour. They were seated by the window, looking out over the fjord.

The sun was setting, and the shadow of the house was flung far out over
the smooth sea. The smoke from the chimney had already reached the rocky
haunt of the eider duck. The cliff was the home of immense flocks of
many-coloured birds, for it was spring, and the breeding season was at
its height. Numbers of gorgeous drakes were swimming round the rock, and
amongst them a few plump and comely eider duck, taking an hour’s rest
from their duties before sunset, leaving the nest and eggs to the care
of the father birds.

Sera Daniel enjoyed the view, for he was looking out over his property.
The eider-duck cliffs, even those farther out, were by ancient custom
regarded as belonging to the living. And they brought him in a very nice
little sum.

He puffed away at his long pipe in silence.

Bjarni noticed his contented air, and was not pleased. Surely it would
be more reasonable that the revenue from the eider-duck cliffs should
come to him, Bjarni, as owner of the shore lands. But priests were all
alike, a greedy lot! For ages past they had been petted and spoiled with
all sorts of unjust privileges and unreasonable perquisites. And what
did they do for it all? Nothing in the least degree useful, nor ever
had—unless it were something useful to grow fat themselves in a
comfortable cure.

Such was Bjarni’s train of thought. And he meant it all quite earnestly.
But he said nothing, for, outwardly, he and Sera Daniel were the best of
friends—drank their grog together, and played cards in all good
fellowship. At the moment, they were only waiting for the doctor to come
and take a hand.

No, in his inmost heart Bjarni detested the priest; the portly figure of
the man was a continual eyesore to him. Sera Daniel was a man of
imposing presence, there was dignity and calm authority in his carriage
and bearing, and Bjarni, having no such attributes himself, found herein
further cause for jealousy.

It would be hard to find a less imposing specimen of the human male than
Bjarni Jonsson, trader, of Hofsfjordur. Outwardly, he resembled more an
ill-nourished errand boy than anything else. His face was grey and
angular, the top of his head was covered with a growth of colourless
hair, and his pale blue eyes were as a rule void of expression, for the
reason that he was in constant fear of betraying his ever-present
jealousy of every one and everything round him. And the struggle had
marked his face, his eyes, every movement of his puny, stunted body,
with a stamp of servile cunning. His clothes hung about him like the
rags of a scarecrow in the field, the draggled moustache that hid most
of his mouth added to the general impression of meanness and
insincerity.

At a first glance, Sera Daniel presented a complete contrast.

His burly, well-fed body seemed to exhale an atmosphere of
cordiality——an ecclesiastical cheerfulness which gave his whole bearing
something of the stamp of the prelate. His fair hair carefully brushed
back from the broad, arched forehead, the blue, beaming eyes, the frank
expression of his clean-shaven face, which, however, never for a moment
relapsed from the bright, superior, yet mild professional mask of
dignity, of healthy godliness attained through inward strife and by the
grace of Heaven; the placid, yet telling gestures of his somewhat large,
plump hands; the sonorous voice with its echo of sanctity; and last, not
least, his faultless black attire—in short, his whole outward appearance
seemed to combine human forbearance and lofty understanding with the
rare power of living a full and yet exemplary life, kindly chastening
himself as well as others—all the qualities that go to the making of a
true servant of the Lord.

But the simple, canny folk among whom he lived, and from whom he himself
was sprung, had not been long in penetrating beneath these externals.
They realized that he played his part well, and with a suitable mask,
which they tolerated, even respecting him for the same—at any rate, in
his presence, or when young people were about. But the elders among
themselves were not afraid of unmasking Sera Daniel with a sly wink, as
it were, in a manner of which he would certainly not have approved, nor
found consistent with the respect due to their spiritual guide.

Men played their parts well in the parish of Hofsfjordur.

And in the opinion of his parishioners, Sera Daniel was not the only one
who played a part at variance with the character behind the mask, though
Sera Daniel himself might have believed so.

There was one family, or more exactly, a single figure, that did not fit
in with the cast of the local comedy. A keen observer could not have
failed to notice that the life of the community centred round this one
man: a dominant figure among the rest, who knew how to shape their views
according to his will. And he was a source of much annoyance to the
actors proper, more especially those who had cast themselves for leading
rôles. That man was Ørlygur à Borg.

Ørlygur was in his forty-second year. From early youth he had been the
natural leader among his fellows; first and foremost, of course, as only
son and heir to Borg, but also by virtue of his personality, which was
excellently suited to bear the rank and wealth and responsibility
inherited from his forebears, who had, as far back as the memory of man,
been the self-appointed and generally respected leaders of the
community.

Ørlygur à Borg, apart from being the greatest landowner in the district,
was also chairman of the local council, and led the singing in church—in
short, all that an Icelander combining wealth with intellect and
personality could attain.

Moreover—and this was perhaps the corner-stone in the edifice of his
absolute authority—he was a conscientious adviser, an untiring and
disinterested helper of the poor, and an experienced and successful,
albeit unlicensed, veterinary surgeon. In this last capacity he was
consulted not only by the district, but also by many from other
counties, who were glad of his unfeed advice and skilful aid.

It was generally recognized that Ørlygur à Borg was ever ready to serve
and assist any one, however humble, provided they accepted him as a
ruler. He never tolerated any attempt to place others on a footing of
equality with himself, or any violation of his privileges, however
slight. To those who submitted to his sway, he was a mild and gracious
god; to those who forgot the deference he demanded, he was a merciless
tyrant, swooping down on them in defiance of all generally accepted
notions of justice—though he would forget and forgive readily enough
when it was over.

The peasants did not mind this. To them, Ørlygur à Borg was a kind of
human Providence—no less inevitable, and probably more pleasant, than
the divine. They knew, of course, that there was a King who ruled over
all, including the King of Borg. But they were nevertheless inclined to
place both on the same level. In the event of conflict arising,
doubtless Ørlygur à Borg would be a match for the other—even to gaining
for himself the armlet of sovereign power, as Halldor Snorrason had done
in the fight with Harold Hardrada. Ørlygur was equal to that at least.

Their faith in him amounted almost to a religion. They felt themselves,
under his protection, secure and well provided for.

Some few there were, however, who did not approve of the unlimited power
generally conceded to Ørlygur à Borg, and disliked what they considered
his unjustifiable assumption of superiority. This spring, there were at
least three such discontented souls within the parish. Two of them we
have met already—Sera Daniel and the trader, drinking their grog in the
parlour looking over the sea. And the third of the rebels was the
doctor, whom they were expecting to join them in a hand at cards.

The priest and the trader, when alone together, spoke but little. They
had no interests in common. Their intellectual sphere was very limited,
and both had the same characteristic of the narrow-minded: concentrating
every atom of thought and will each on his own well-being. Consequently,
all talk between the two was obviously insincere; so much so, that even
these two not very sensitive beings realized the fact, and instinctively
shrank from any intimacy of conversation.

On this occasion, as ill-luck would have it, the doctor kept them
waiting longer than usual, and Bjarni, as host, could not well sit all
the time without a word. At last, by way of saying something, he asked
how the wool was getting on.

“Dry and packed three days ago,” answered Sera Daniel.

Bjarni’s eyes flashed, and a smile flickered for a moment over his
wooden face.

Sera Daniel read that smile, and marked the scorn of it. But as the
scorn, he knew, applied no less to the smiler than to himself he
refrained, on principle, from taking offence.

Bjarni looked him straight in the face, and their eyes met. Then
suddenly both realized that this innocent and haphazard attempt at
casual conversation had opened up common ground between them, an
unexpected community of interest where each had only thought to find the
altogether unwished-for company of the other.

Bjarni did not quite know how to improve the opportunity at first. He
decided on a gambit of innocent raillery.

“Yes, we’re ready to weigh it now, I suppose ... that is, of course....”

Sera Daniel looked searchingly at him, unwilling as yet to take any
definite step himself.

“What are you paying this season?”

“Sixty-five for best white, forty-two for black and mixed.”

Sera Daniel glanced at him with a curious smile. “Is that—ah—the
ordinary price, or what you are paying Ørlygur à Borg?”

The trader’s face flushed violently; the hand holding the glass trembled
a little. Without waiting for an answer, Sera Daniel made another shot.

“Or perhaps you are thinking of paying the same price to all—for once?”

Bjarni eyed him awhile in silence. He seemed to be turning over
something in his mind. The priest felt the glance, and knew what lay
behind it, but evinced no discomfiture. On the contrary, he met the
trader’s eyes with a smile of irritating calm.

At last Bjarni spoke.

“Yes,” he said slowly, “if you can let me have your wool tomorrow
morning.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

That same night Ormarr sat on the slope of the hill looking down to
Hofsa—just above the spot where the wool from Borg was washed every
spring. He was keeping watch over the clip. Large quantities were
already dry and stowed in bags; the grassy slopes were dotted with
little white piles of that which had still to be spread, waiting till
the morning sun had drawn the dew.

Silently, filled with emotion, Ormarr gazed at the beauty and peace of
the spring night. The sky was clear and blue, and bright as day.

Below him flowed the crystal rivulets, and farther off, above green
mountain slopes veiled in the glistening web of dew, rose stark grey
cliffs, furrowed by glimmering waters, higher up again, the luminous
white of the snow peaks, tinted all the night through with the gold of
dancing sun rays.

From his childhood Ormarr had claimed the privilege of keeping guard
during the spring nights. In the earlier part of the season, he took his
post on the freshly growing pasture lands, keeping the sheep and horses
from straying in to nibble off the first blades of the young grass.
Later, when the sheep were shorn and driven up to the mountains, he
mounted guard over the wool, keeping a keen look-out for prowling
vagabonds, and covering up the heaps with tarpaulin in case of sudden
rain.

To him, the vigils of these quiet nights were as hours of devotion.
During the lonely watches, he bared his soul in worship of the majesty
of nature, free of the restraint he always felt in the presence of
others. He drank in the fresh night air, with its sweetness of spring,
like a precious draught. And at times, the depth of his feeling brought
great tears to his eyes. Alone, he could allow himself to some extent
thus to give way to emotion, yet even then not without a certain sense
of shame.

Tonight he was sadder than ever. It would be fine tomorrow, the last of
the wool would dry during the day, in time to be fetched away before
evening.

That meant it was his last night’s watch this spring.

His eyes took leave of the wild duck swimming in the stream near their
nests, that he had cared for and protected; several times he had waded
out to see how they fared. He looked the hillside up and down, bidding
good-bye to the buttercups and dandelions—every morning he had watched
their opening, a solitary witness, as they unfolded at the gracious
bidding of the sun. He noted, too, the great clusters of tiny-flowered
forget-me-nots that grew everywhere around.

At five o’clock he rose to go. From one of the chimneys smoke was
already rising, thin and clear as from a censer; old Ossa had hung the
big kettle over the fire for early coffee. A big plate of new bread
would be waiting for him, with butter, meat, cheese, and a steaming cup
of coffee—a delicious meal.

From force of habit he glanced round before moving off; counted the
chimneys from which smoke was rising, and looked about for any other
signs of life. Then suddenly he realized that something unusual was
going on. With trembling hands he adjusted the telescope he always
carried, and looked towards the spot.

A moment later he lowered the glass and stared in bewilderment towards
the fjord. In a flash he realized what was happening, and set off home
at full speed.

Heedless of Ossa and the meal she had already waiting for him, he dashed
up to his father’s room, not even stopping, as was his wont, to caress
the fair curly head of tiny Gudrun, the three-year-old daughter of Pall
à Seyru, whom Ørlygur had adopted. Ormarr loved the child.

He did not stop till he reached his father’s bed. When Ørlygur opened
his eyes, he saw Ormarr standing before him, very pale, and breathless
with his speed. The sight startled even the King of Borg out of his
habitual calm; he sat up with a start. Realizing instinctively that
something was wrong, he reached out for his clothes at once.

“What is it, my son?”

“Father ... Sera Daniel ... carting his wool in already to the
station....”

Ørlygur was already getting into his clothes. He stopped motionless for
a second; then a faint smile passed over his face, and he seemed to be
thinking. In less than a minute he had made up his mind.

“The horses!”

Ormarr did not wait for any further order. He hurried out of the room,
snatched up a bridle, and ran out calling:

“Gryla, Køput, Kondut!”

Barking and delighted, the farm dogs clustered round him, and followed
him out into the paddock, where he caught his father’s horse and vaulted
into the saddle.

Ten minutes later, forty horses were stamping and neighing ready for
work. Swiftly they were brought round, the pack-saddle put on, and
loaded up with the finished wool.

Ormarr had overheard his father’s brief, sharp orders to the foreman, a
man he could trust. He had kept close at hand all the time, listening
eagerly to what was said. At last, when all was ready for the start, he
looked up earnestly.

“Father—may I?”

Ørlygur à Borg looked at his son in surprise.

“You? Nay, lad, I’m afraid that would hardly do.”

But his voice was not so decided, harsh almost, as it was wont to be
when he refused a request. He even glanced inquiringly, as it were, at
the foreman, who smiled back merrily in return. That seemed to settle
it. Ormarr’s eyes were bright with anticipation.

Ørlygur laid one hand on his son’s shoulder—not patting his head or
cheek as he generally did—and said:

“Good. You can do the talking. You heard what is to be said and done—you
are sure you understand?”

Ormarr did not give himself time to answer. But his leap into the saddle
was enough; evidently he had grasped the spirit of his father’s
commands.

They did not take the usual route to the trading station; anything
moving along that road would be visible from below for the greater part
of the way. And they were to come unexpectedly. Therefore they took the
road across Borgarhals and Nordurdal, so as to reach the station before
any knew of their coming.

                  *       *       *       *       *

It was the unwritten law of the district that no wool should be brought
to the station before the King of Borg had sent in his. The custom dated
back further than any could remember, it was part of the traditional
precedence generally conceded to the masters of Borg. At first, it had
sprung from a natural desire among the people to show their respect for
their chieftain and benefactor. Then, when it had grown to be a
time-honoured custom, the men of Borg had taken care to have it
maintained, regarding any violation as a personal affront, a
challenge—and none had ever known such challenge to remain unpunished.

There was, moreover, another custom in connection with the sales of
wool—to wit, that Ørlygur à Borg fixed his own price for his, while the
others who had wool to sell had to be satisfied with what the trader
chose to pay them. Ørlygur took no heed of ruling market prices, but
based his figures on the prices he had to pay during the past year for
goods he himself had bought from the trader.

No one grumbled at the arrangement. Ørlygur always paid cash for what he
ordered, while every one else found it necessary to take goods on
credit; all had an account, great or small, with Bjarni, and were in
consequence dependent on his good-will. They knew, that in the event of
Bjarni’s good-will failing, there was always Ørlygur, ever ready to help
whoever asked.

Truth to tell, Bjarni, the trader, was not a little nervous when Sera
Daniel arrived with his wool early in the morning. He did his best,
however, to conceal his uneasiness, but the false jocularity with which
he strove to hide it was belied by the anxious glances wherewith he
scanned every now and then the road from Borg.

The weighing in was done in the big warehouse. Sera Daniel was smiling
and confident as usual, though his eyes showed signs of having slept ill
the night before.

“Well, Sera Daniel,” said Bjarni, who was watching the weighing with
mock earnestness, “this is a bold stroke of yours indeed.” He glanced
hurriedly in the direction of Borg as he spoke. “Frankly I was not at
all sure that you would have ventured, when it came to the point.
Anyhow, I fancy this marks the end of ‘the King’s’ supremacy.”

The doctor came up, yawning, and rubbing his eyes.

“Aha—this looks nice,” he observed. And then, referring to Bjarni’s last
remark, he went on: “And it’s high time we did start acting for
ourselves. Rebellion, eh? I tell you what, I’ll stand drinks all round
when you’ve finished here.”

There was great commotion at the station; folk hung about in crowds
outside the stockroom. A few only dared to enter; the rest preferred to
wait and see what happened. They were not without a certain satisfaction
at the act of rebellion, albeit aware that it was their duty to feel
indignant. There was a general atmosphere of excitement—what would
happen next?

“And this year the price of wool is the same to all,” said Bjarni
exultantly to the doctor. “If he doesn’t care to deal with me, he can go
to Jon Borgari.”

The doctor laughed loudly, and Sera Daniel smiled approval. Jon Borgari
was a man of sixty, who had set up on his own account in a small way,
some five years back. On payment of fifty Kroner, he had acquired a
licence to trade. His store was a mean little place, his whole
stock-in-trade hardly amounted to more than one of Ørlygur’s ordinary
purchases from Bjarni. He had found it impossible to do any considerable
business, as the peasants were all in debt to Bjarni already, and could
not transfer their custom elsewhere. Jon was considerably older than
Bjarni, but the latter’s business was of longer standing. Bjarni had
moved to Hofsfjordur twelve years before, and partly, at least, by his
industry and smartness, he had compelled an old-established house in the
place, a branch of a foreign firm, to close down. This he could never
have done had it not been for the patronage of Ørlygur à Borg.

It was commonly supposed that Jon Borgari had saved a good sum in his
time—and the idea was further supported by his recent marriage to a
maiden of eighteen, who had accepted him in preference to many eager
suitors of the younger generation. But no one ever dreamed of
considering Jon Borgari as a possible “purveyor to the King.”

Bjarni’s warehousemen were busy weighing in the priest’s consignment.
There was still no sign of life on the road from Borg. And gradually
even Bjarni himself began to forget his fears.

Then suddenly the blow fell. Ormarr with his five men, and the laden
horses, came galloping up: Ørlygur à Borg had sent his wool.

Bjarni was struck with amazement; for a moment he could not grasp the
situation. Sera Daniel retired prudently to the back of the room. The
doctor joined him, with an expression of pleasant anticipation on his
puffy face. This was going to be amusing. And, fortunately, he himself
had nothing to do with the affair.

When the first shock had passed off, Bjarni realized with a feeling of
relief that Ørlygur himself had stayed at home. To the onlooker this was
a wonder in itself. Never before had Ørlygur à Borg sent in his wool
without accompanying it in person.

For a moment all sorts of wild conjectures passed through Bjarni’s
brain. And then—he committed the fatal error of coming to the conclusion
which best suited himself; Ørlygur must have stayed away in order to
avoid being present at his own defeat, in the setting aside of ancient
custom.

Ormarr did not dismount. He rode straight up to the trader, and said:

“My father has given orders that his wool is to be weighed in at once.”

He spoke without the slightest trace of emotion; as if it were a matter
of course that the trader should stop the weighing of any one else’s
wool and attend to Ørlygur’s forthwith.

Bjarni again indulged in an erroneous inference: Ørlygur à Borg had
stayed away because he feared his demands might be refused. And if “the
King” himself thought that possible—why, then, it could be done!

A wave of joy swept over Bjarni. He felt as if he had already won a
decisive battle against heavy odds. And his reply was given in a tone
more overbearing than usual—though he regretted it the moment he had
spoken.

“We can’t very well stop weighing in this lot now. What do you say, Sera
Daniel?”

Sera Daniel said nothing at all. His friend Bjarni would have to carry
the matter through without assistance.

Bjarni turned to Ormarr once more—the boy was still in the saddle—and
adopting a fatherly tone, went on:

“But it won’t take very long, you know. If you start unloading the
horses now, and get the bales undone, while we’re finishing this, there
won’t be much time lost.”

But before any one could say more, a new development occurred. Ørlygur à
Borg, on his snorting, fiery mount, Sleipnir, dashed into the stockroom.

His entry came like a thunder-clap. The onlookers, who had kept their
distance up to now, drew closer in, holding their breath. No one, not
even Ørlygur’s own men, with the exception of Ormarr, had expected this.

Bjarni, Sera Daniel, and the doctor greeted him in servile fashion; he
answered with an impatient gesture, as of a sovereign in ungracious mood
towards importunate underlings. Then riding up to Ormarr, he asked
quietly:

“What are you waiting for?”

“They are weighing in Sera Daniel’s wool.”

“Has Bjarni refused to take over mine at once?”

“Yes. He asked us to unload and wait.”

“Good. We will take it back to Borg.”

Then, having given his orders, Ørlygur rode up to Bjarni, pressing him
so close that the foam from his horse bespattered the trader, forcing
him to retreat step by step.

“Now mark you this, Bjarni Jonsson. You can hire horses yourself to
fetch that wool from Borg. But do not come until you are prepared to pay
a heavy price. I warn you, my wool this year will not be cheap.”

Then, without a word of farewell, he turned his back on the speechless
and astonished trio, and with a cheery smile to the crowd, rode
homeward, followed by his men.

That day messengers were sent out from Borg to all the farmers round, to
say that Ørlygur à Borg was willing to buy wool for cash, at the same
prices as offered by the trader.

Next morning, he sent off one of his men with a letter and a
saddle-horse to Jon Borgari. Jon read the letter, mounted at once, and
rode back to Borg, where he was closeted with Ørlygur for some time.
When he left the place, he looked as if ten years had fallen from his
shoulders.

The farmers understood that Ørlygur’s offer to buy their wool for cash
was equivalent to a command—they must choose between him and the trader.
And they did not hesitate a moment.

Ørlygur paid them in gold and silver. Then, with his help, they wrote
out the lists of the goods they required, the lists being subsequently
handed to Jon Borgari. Jon was now Ørlygur’s ally, and in a very short
time his unpretending little store was threatening the trade of Bjarni
Jonsson’s own.

Bjarni Jonsson’s trick had recoiled upon himself. He got Sera Daniel’s
wool—but not a pound from any one beside.




                              CHAPTER III


One burning hot afternoon, late in the summer, Ormarr was sitting up on
the edge of a high ridge of Borgarfjall, to the west of Borg. A great
flock of sheep grazed on the plateau below.

Ormarr, as shepherd, found his task light. It was just after
lambing-time, and for the first two or three days the sheep had been
difficult to handle. Full of anxiety, and bleating piteously, they
rushed about in all directions, vainly seeking their offspring. Now,
however, they had more or less accustomed themselves to the new state of
things, and kept fairly well together, so that Ormarr was free to devote
most of his time to his favourite pursuits: playing the violin, and
dreaming.

He made a curious picture, this fourteen-year-old peasant lad, as he sat
there, clad in rough homespun, his clothes fitting clumsily, and hiding
the lithe beauty of his frame. The clear-cut face, the strong chin
resting on the violin, and the lean hand with its supple fingers running
over the strings, contrasted strangely with the everyday coat, darned
and patched in many places.

Often he fell into a reverie, his dark eyes gazing on the distant
mountains, the fingers relaxing, and the slender brown hand with the bow
resting on his knee. The face, too thin for a boy of his age, bore a
grave and thoughtful expression, with a touch of melancholy. The black
masses of curling, unruly hair, and the faint coppery tinge in the skin,
suggested Celtic descent.

Yet despite the trace of something foreign in his appearance, he was at
heart a true child of his country. The wistful, dreamy thoughts that
burned in his dark, passionate eyes, betrayed that rich and abundant
imagination peculiar to the sons of Iceland, fostered by the great
solitude and desolate yet fertile grandeur of the land itself. So deeply
is the sense of that grandeur rooted in their hearts, that even those
who have roamed the world over, and lived most of their lives in milder
and richer climes, will yet declare that Iceland is the most beautiful
of all.

Another typical trait in Ormarr’s nature was the melancholy that
consumed his soul—a product of youthful self-absorption without the
corresponding experience.

His descent from the ancient and noble race of Borg was apparent in his
chariness of words, in his credulity,—it was a thing inconceivable, that
he or any of his should tell a falsehood,—in his self-reliance, and
strong belief that he was in the right, as long as he followed the
dictates of his own conscience. Young as he was, every look, every
feature, betrayed the born chieftain in him.

This was evident most of all in his music—which consisted mainly of
dreams and fantasies he had himself composed. From the first day he had
learned to hold the instrument, he had thrown into his music a burning
interest and an overwhelming love. It gave him the only possible outlet
for the longing that filled him.

Loneliness and despair sobbed in the sweet and passionate strains; the
strings vibrated with a deep desire, that yet had no conscious aim, but
the sound brought relief, though never satisfying to the full.

His playing revealed his soul as a wanderer in the wilderness—as a giant
whose strength is doomed to slumber under the weight of unbreakable
shackles; it showed that, to him, life was a slow, consuming pain, the
purpose of which he could not grasp; that he was born with a wealth of
power, yet found no single thing to which he could devote it. Here he
was, heir to the estate, and yet—perhaps for that very reason—born in
bondage.

Despite his youth, Ormarr was alive to the danger of his changing moods,
which, as he often thought, bordered on insanity. Proud as he was of
being heir to Borg, he nevertheless felt a smouldering hatred of his
heritage, since it fettered him from birth. With all these longings in
his soul, he was conscious of being himself part and parcel of Borg;
something told him that here, and here alone, was the soil in which his
personality and varying moods could grow into one harmonious and united
whole. He had only to follow in the steps of his fathers. But this,
again, seemed too easy a solution of the riddle of life—he preferred a
struggle to the death. It was as if his descent, and his natural
prospects, excluded him from all the adventures he longed for; the part
for which he seemed cast was beneath the level of his strength and
ability.

But he realized that any outward expression of such thoughts would
compromise him, and bring disgrace upon his family: he must conceal
them, hide them in silence, never breathe a word of it all to any other.
Only in his music, where he could speak without betraying himself by
words, could he venture to ease his heart of its burden.

He felt like a galley slave, chained to the oar for life, without hope
of escape. The idea of rebellion, of emancipation, had never crossed his
mind. Had any one suggested such a thing, he would have risen up in arms
against it at once, for, in spite of all, he felt himself so at one with
his race that to desert it thus would be nothing less than to betray
himself.

                  *       *       *       *       *

That same afternoon an unexpected event took place at Borg. The Vicar,
Sera Daniel, accompanied by Bjarni Jonsson, came to call.

Ørlygur à Borg was resting on his bed, which in the daytime was covered,
like a couch, with a many-coloured rug, when news was brought him of the
visit. The girl informed him that she had asked the visitors into the
big hall. Ørlygur smiled when he heard their names. He had just returned
from a sale of driftwood, held at the instance of one of the farmers
whose lands ran down to the shore, and who yearly gathered in large
stocks of washed-up timber, which was subsequently sold, either
privately or by auction. He was tired, and felt too comfortable where he
was to care about moving.

“Let them come in here if they have anything to say,” he told the girl.

The two men exchanged glances when the message was brought them. Each
found a certain satisfaction in witnessing the humiliation of the other,
which helped him to bear his own. Nevertheless, on entering Ørlygur’s
room, both were visibly embarrassed.

Ørlygur himself did nothing to set them at their ease. Without rising,
he 