THE DESIRE OF THE MOTH AND THE COME ON


BY EUGENE MANLOVE RHODES

ILLUSTRATIONS BY H.T. DUNN




ILLUSTRATIONS



They were riding hard

"Gentlemen--be seated!"




THE DESIRE OF THE MOTH




Chapter I

    _"Little Next Door--her years are few--
    Loves me, more than her elders do;
    Says, my wrinkles become me so;
    Marvels much at the tales I know.
    Says, we shall marry when she is grown----"_


The little happy song stopped short. John Wesley Pringle, at the
mesa's last headland, drew rein to adjust his geography. This was new
country to him.

Close behind, Organ Mountain flung up a fantasy of spires,
needle-sharp and bare and golden. The long straight range--saw-toothed
limestone save for this twenty-mile sheer upheaval of the
Organ--stretched away to north and south against the unclouded sky,
till distance turned the barren gray to blue-black, to blue, to misty
haze; till the sharp, square-angled masses rounded to hillocks--to a
blur--a wavy line--nothing.

More than a hundred miles to the north-west, two midget mountains
wavered in the sky. John Wesley nodded at their unforgotten shapes and
pieced this vast landscape to the patchwork map in his head. Those toy
hills were San Mateo and Magdalena. Pringle had passed that way on a
bygone year, headed east. He was going west, now.

"I'm too prosperous here," he had explained to Beebe and Ballinger,
his partners on Rainbow. "I'm tedious to myself. Guess I'll take a
_pasear_ back to Prescott. Railroad? Who, me? Why, son, I like to
travel when I go anywheres. Just starting and arriving don't delight
me any. Besides, I don't know that strip along the border. I'll ride."

It was a tidy step to Prescott--say, as far as from Philadelphia to
Savannah, or from Richmond to Augusta; but John Wesley had made many
such rides in the Odyssey of his wonder years. Some of them had been
made in haste. But there was no haste now. Sam Bass, his corn-fed
sorrel, was hardly less sleek and sturdy than at the start, though
a third of the way was behind him. Pringle rode by easy stages, and
where he found himself pleased, there he tarried for a space.

With another friendly nod to the northward hills that marked a day of
his past, Pringle turned his eyes to the westlands, outspread and vast
before him. To his right the desert stretched away, a mighty plain
dotted with low hills, rimmed with a curving, jagged range. Beyond
that range was a nothingness, a hiatus that marked the sunken valley
of the Rio Grande; beyond that, a headlong infinity of unknown ranges,
tier on tier, yellow or brown or blue; broken, tumbled, huddled,
scattered, with gulfs between to tell of unseen plains and hidden
happy valleys--altogether giving an impression of rushing toward him,
resistless, like the waves of a stormy sea.

At his feet the plain broke away sharply, in a series of steplike
sandy benches, to where the Rio Grande bore quartering across the
desert, turning to the Mexican sea; the Mesilla Valley here, a slender
ribbon of mossy green, broidered with loops of flashing river--a
ribbon six miles by forty, orchard, woodland, and green field, greener
for the desolate gray desert beyond and the yellow hills of sand
edging the valley floor. Below him Las Uvas, chief town of the valley,
lay basking in the sun, tiny square and street bordered with greenery:
its domino houses white-walled in the sun, with larger splashes of red
from courthouse or church or school.

Far on the westering desert, beyond the valley, Pringle saw a white
feather of smoke from a toiling train; beyond that a twisting gap in
the blue of the westmost range.

"That's our road." He lifted his bridle rein. "Amble along, Sam!"

To that amble he crooned to himself, pleasantly, half-dreamily--as if
he voiced indirectly some inner thought--quaint snatches of old song:

    _"She came to the gate and she peeped in--
    Grass and the weeds up to her chin;
    Said, 'A rake and a hoe and a fantail plow
    Would suit you better than a wife just now.'"_

And again:

    _"Schooldays are over now,
      Lost all our bliss;
    But love remembers yet
      Quarrel and kiss.
    Still, as in days of yore----"_

Then, after a long silence, with a thoughtful earnestness that Rainbow
would scarce have credited, he quoted a verse from what he was wont to
call Billy Beebe's Bible:

      _"One Moment in Annihilation's waste,
      One Moment of the Well of Life to taste--
      The Stars are setting, and the Caravan
    Starts for the Dawn of----Nothing. Oh, make haste!"_

After late dinner at the Gadsden Purchase, Pringle had tidings of the
Motion Picture Palace; and thither he bent his steps. He was late and
the palace was a very small palace indeed; it was with difficulty that
he spied in the semidarkness an empty seat in a side section. A fat
lady and a fatter man, in the seats nearest the aisle, obligingly
moved over rather than risk any attempt to squeeze by.

Beyond them, as he took the end seat, Pringle was dimly aware of a
girl who looked at him rather attentively.

He turned his mind to the screen, where a natty and noble young man,
with a chin, bit off his words distinctly and smote his extended palm
with folded gloves to emphasize the remarks he was making to a far
less natty man with black mustaches. John Wesley rightly concluded
that this second man, who gnashed his teeth so convincingly, and at
whom an incredibly beautiful young lady looked with haughty disdain,
was the villain, and foiled.

The blond and shaven hero, with a magnificent gesture, motioned the
villain to begone! That baffled person, after waiting long enough to
register despair, spread his fingers across his brow and be-went; the
hero turned, held out his arms; the scornful young beauty crept into
them. Click! On the screen appeared a scroll:

    Keep Your Seats. Two Minutes to Change
                  Reels.

The lights were turned on. Pringle looked at the crowd--girls,
grandmas, mothers with their families, many boys, and few men;
Americans, Mexicans, well-dressed folk and roughly dressed, all
together. Many were leaving; among them Pringle's fat and obliging
neighbors rose with a pleasant: "Excuse me, please!"

A stream of newcomers trickled in through the door. As Pringle sat
down the lights were dimmed again. Simultaneously the girl he had
noticed beyond the fat couple moved over to the seat next to his own.
Pringle did not look at her; and a little later he felt a hand on his
sleeve.

"Tut, tut!" said Pringle in a tolerant undertone. "Why, chicken,
you're not trying to get gay with your old Uncle Dudley, are you?"

"John Wesley Pringle!" came the answer in a furious whisper, each
indignant word a missile. "How dare you! How dare you speak to me like
that?"

"What!" said Pringle, peering. "What! Stella Vorhis! I can hardly
believe it!"

"But it's oh-so-true!" said Stella, rising. "Let's go--we can't talk
here."

"That was one awful break I made. I most sincerely and humbly beg your
pardon," Pringle said on the sidewalk.

Stella laughed.

"That's all right--I understand--forget it! You hadn't looked at me.
But I knew you when you first came in--only I wasn't sure till the
lights were turned on. Of course it would be great fun to tease
you--pretend to be shocked and dreadfully angry, and all that--but
I haven't got time. And oh, John Wesley, I'm so delighted to see you
again! Let's go over to the park. Not but what I was dreadfully angry,
sure enough, until I had a second to think. Why don't you say you're
glad to see me--after five years?"

"Stella! You know I am. Six years, please. But I thought you were
still in Prescott?"

"We came here three years ago. Here's a bench. Now tell it to me!"

But Pringle stood beside and looked down at her without speech, with
a smile unexpected from a face so lean, so brown, so year-bitten and
iron-hard--a smile which happily changed that face, and softened it.

The girl's eyes danced at him.

"I'm so glad you've come, John Wesley! Good old Wes!"

"So I am--both those little things. Six years!" he said slowly. "Dear
me--dear both of us! That will make you twenty-five. You don't look a
day over twenty-four! But you're still Stella Vorhis?"

She met his gaze gravely; then her lids drooped and a wave of red
flushed her face.

"I am Stella Vorhis--yet."

"Meaning--for a little while yet?"

"Meaning, for a little while yet. That will come later, John Wesley.
Oh, I'll tell you, but not just now. You tell about John Wesley,
first--and remember, anything you say may be used against you. Where
have you been? Were you dead? Why didn't you write? Has the world
used you well? Sit down, Mr. John Wesley Also-Ran Pringle, and give an
account of yourself!"

He sat beside her: she laid her hand across his gnarled brown fingers
with an unconscious caress.

"It's good to see you, old-timer! Begin now--I, John Wesley Pringle,
am come from going to and fro upon the earth and from walking up and
down in it. But I didn't ask you where you were living. Perhaps you
have a--home of your own now."

John Wesley firmly lifted her slim fingers from his hand and as firmly
deposited them in her lap.

"Kindly keep your hands to yourself, young woman," he said with
stately dignity.

"Here is an exact account of all my time since I saw you: I have been
hungry, thirsty, sleepy, tired. To remedy these evils, upon expert
advice I have eaten, drunk, slept, and rested. I have worked and
played, been dull and gay, busy and idle, foolish and unwise.
That's all. Oh, yes--I'm living in Rainbow Mountain; cattle. Two
pardners--nice boys but educated. Had another one; he's married now,
poor dear--and just as happy as if he had some sense."

"You're not?"

"Not what--happy or married?"

"Married, silly!"

"And I'm not. Now it's your turn. Where do you live? Here in town?"

"Oh, no. Dad's got a farm twenty miles up the river and a ranch out
on the flat. I just came down on the morning train to do a little
shopping and go back on the four-forty-eight--and I'll have to be
starting soon. You'll walk down to the station with me?"

"But the sad story of your life?" objected Pringle.

"Oh, I'll tell you that by installments. You're to make us a long,
long visit, you know--just as long as you can stay. You're horseback,
of course? Well, then, ride up to-night. Ask for Aden Station. We live
just beyond there."

"But the Major was a very hostile major when I saw him last."

"Oh, father's got all over that. He hadn't heard your side of it then.
He often speaks of you now and he'll be glad to see you."

"To-morrow, then. My horse is tired--I'll stay here to-night."

"You'll find dad changed," said the girl. "This is the first time in
his life he has ever been at ease about money matters. He's really
quite well-to-do."

"That's good. I'm doing well in that line too. I forgot to tell you."
There was no elation in his voice; he looked back with a pang to the
bold and splendid years of their poverty. "Then the Major will quit
wandering round like a lost cat, won't he?"

"I think he likes it here--only for the crazy-mad political feeling;
and I think he's settled down for good."

"High time, I think, at his age."

"You needn't talk! Dad's only ten years older than you are." She
leaned her cheek on her hand, she brushed back a little stray tendril
of midnight hair from her dark eyes, and considered him thoughtfully.
"Why, John Wesley, I've known you nearly all my life and you don't
look much older now than when I first saw you."

"That was in Virginia City. You were just six years old and your pony
ran away with you. We were great old chums for a month or so. The next
time I saw you was--"

"At Bakersfield--at mother's funeral," said the girl softly. "Then you
came to Prescott, and you had lost your thumb in the meantime; and I
was Little Next Door to you--"

"And Prescott and me, we agreed it was best for both of us that I
should go away."

"Yes; and when you came back you were going to stay. Why didn't you
stay, John Wesley?"

"I think," said Pringle reflectively, "that I have forgotten that."

"Do you know, John Wesley, I have never been back to any place we have
left once? And of all the people I have ever known, you are the only
one I have ever lost track of and found again. And you're always just
the same old John Wesley; always gay and cheerful; nearly always in
trouble; always strong and resourceful--"

"How true!" said Pringle. "Yes, yes; go on!"

"Well, you are! And you're so--so reliable; like Faithful John in the
fairy story. You're different from anyone else I know. You're a good
boy; when you are grown up you shall have a yoke of oxen, over and
above your wages."

"This is very gratifying indeed," observed Pringle. "But--a sweetly
solemn thought comes to me. You were going to tell me about another
boy--the onliest little boy?"

"He's not a boy," said Stella, flushing hotly. "He's a man--a man's
man. You'll like him, John Wesley--he's just your kind. I'm not going
to tell you. You'll see him at our house, with the others. And he'll
be the very one you'd pick out for me yourself. Of course you'll want
to tease me by pretending to guess someone else; but you'll know which
one he is, without me telling you. He stands out apart from all other
men in every way. Come on, John Wesley--it's time to go down to the
station."

Pringle caught step with her.

"And how long--if a reliable old faithful John may ask--before you
become Stella Some-One-Else?"

"At Christmas. And I am a very lucky girl, John. What an absurd
convention it is that people are never supposed to congratulate the
girl--as if no man was ever worth having! Silly, isn't it?"

"Very silly. But then, it's a silly world."

"A delightful world," said Stella, her eyes sparkling. "You don't know
how happy I am. Or perhaps you do know. Tell me honestly, did you ever
l--like anyone, this way?"

"I refuse to answer, by advice of counsel," said John Wesley. "I'll
say this much, though. X marks no spot where any Annie Laurie gave me
her promise true."

When the train had gone John Wesley wandered disconsolately back
to his hotel and rested his elbows on the bar. The white-aproned
attendant hastened to serve him.

"What will it be, sir?"

"Give me a gin pitfall," said John Wesley.




Chapter II


"Cold feet?"

"Horrible!" said Anastacio.

Matthew Lisner, sheriff of Dona Ana, bent a hard eye on his
subordinate.


"It's got to be done," he urged. "To elect our ticket we must have
all the respectable and responsible people of the valley. If we can
provoke Foy into an outbreak----"

"Not we--you," corrected Anastacio. "Myself, I do not feel provoking."

"Are you going to lay down on me?"

"If you care to put it that way--yes. Kit Foy is just the man to leave
alone."

"Now, listen!" said the sheriff impatiently. "Half the valley is owned
by newcomers, men of substance, who, with the votes they influence
or control, will decide the election. Foy is half a hero with them,
because of these vague old stories. But let him be stirred up to
violence now and you'll see! They won't see any romance in it--just an
open outrage; they will flock to us to the last man. Ours is the party
of law and order--"

"Law _to_ order, some say."

The veins swelled in the sheriff's heavy face and thick neck; he
regarded his deputy darkly.

"That comes well from you, Barela! Don't you see, with the law on our
side all these men of substance will be with us unconditionally?
I tell you, Christopher Foy is the brains of his party. Once he is
discredited--"

"And I tell you that I am the brains of your party and I'll have
nothing to do with your fine plan. 'Tis an old stratagem to call
oppression, law, and resistance to oppression, lawlessness. You tried
just that in ninety-six, didn't you? And I never could hear that our
side had any the best of it or that the good name of Dona Ana was in
any way bettered by our wars. Come, Mr. Lisner--the Kingdom of Lady
Ann has been quiet now for nearly eight years. Let us leave it so. For
myself, the last row brought me reputation and place, made me chief
deputy under two sheriffs--so I need have the less hesitation in
setting forth my passionate preference for peace."

"You have as much to gain as I have," growled the sheriff. "Besides
your own cinch, you have one of your _gente_ for deputy in every
precinct in the county."

"Exactly! And if we have wars again, who but the Barelas would bear
the brunt? No, no, Mr. Matt Lisner; while I may be a merely ornamental
chief deputy, it will never be denied that I am a very careful chief
to my _gente_. Be sure that I shall think more than once or twice
before I set a man of my men at a useless hazard to pleasure you--or
to reëlect you."

"You speak plainly."

"I intend to. I speak for three hundred--and we vote solid. Make no
mistake, Mr. Lisner. You need me in your business, but I can do nicely
without you."

"Perhaps you'd like to be sheriff yourself."

"I might like it--except that I am not as young and foolish as I was,"
said Anastacio, smiling. "Now that I am so old, and so wise and all,
it is clear to see that neither myself nor any of the fighting men of
the mad old days--on either side--should be sheriff."

"You were not always so thoughtful of the best interests of the dear
pee-pul," sneered the sheriff.

"That I wasn't. I was as silly and hot-brained a fool as either side
could boast. But you, Sheriff, are neither silly nor hot-headed. In
cold blood you are planning that men shall die; that other men shall
rot in prison. Why? For hate and revenge? Not even that. Oh, a little
spice of revenge, perhaps; Foy and his friends made you something of
a laughing stock. But your main motive is--money. And I don't see why.
You've got all the money any one man needs now."

"I notice you get your share."

"I hope so. But, even as a money-making proposition, your
troubled-voters policy is a mistake. All the mountain men want is to
be let alone, and you might be sheriff for life for all they care. But
you fan up every little bicker into a lawsuit--don't I know? Just for
the mileage--ten cents a mile each way in a county that's jam full of
miles from one edge to the other; ten cents a mile each way for
each and every arrest and subpoena. You drag them to court twice a
year--the farmer at seed time and harvest, the cowman from the spring
and fall round-ups. It hurts, it cripples them, they ride thirty
miles to vote against you; it costs you all the extra mileage money to
offset their votes. As a final folly, you purpose deliberately to stir
up the old factions. What was it Napoleon said? 'It is worse than
a crime: it is a blunder.' I'll tell you now, not a Barela nor an
Ascarate shall stir a foot in such a quarrel. If you want to bait Kit
Foy, do it yourself--or set your city police on him."

"I will."

A faint tinge of color came to the clear olive of Anastacio's cheek as
he rose.

"But don't promise my place to any of them, sheriff. I might hear of
it."

"Stranger," said Ben Creagan, "you can't play pool! I can't--and I
beat you four straight games. You better toddle your little trotters
off to bed." The words alone might have been mere playfulness; glance
and tone made plain the purposed offense.

The after-supper crowd in the hotel barroom had suddenly slipped away,
leaving Max Barkeep, three others, and John Wesley Pringle--the last
not unnoting of nudge and whisper attending the exodus. Since that,
Pringle had suffered, unprotesting, more gratuitous insults than
he had met in all the rest of his stormy years. His curiosity was
aroused; he played the stupid, unseeing, patient, and timid person he
was so eminently not. Plainly these people desired his absence; and
Pringle highly resolved to know why. He now blinked mildly.

"But I'm not sleepy a-tall," he objected.

He tried and missed an easy shot; he chalked his cue with assiduous
care.

"Here, you! Quit knockin' those balls round!" bawled Max, the
bartender. "What you think this is--a kindergarten?"

"Why, I paid for all the games I lost, didn't I?" asked Pringle, much
abashed.

He mopped his face. It was warm, though the windows and doors were
open.

"Well, nobody's going to play any more with you," snapped Max. "You
bore 'em."

He pyramided the balls and covered the table. With a sad and lingering
backward look Pringle slouched abjectly through the wide-arched
doorway to the bar.

"Come on, fellers--have something."

"Naw!" snarled José Espalin. "I'm a-tryin' to theenk. Shut up, won't
you?"

Pringle sighed patiently at the rebuff and stole a timid glance at the
thinker. Espalin was a lean little, dried-up manikin, with legs,
arms, and mustaches disproportionately long for his dwarfish body. His
black, wiry hair hung in ragged witchlocks; his black pin-point eyes
were glittering, cold, and venomous. He looked, thought Pringle, very
much like a spider.

"I'm steerin' you right, old man," said Creagan. "You'd better drag it
for bed."

"I ain't sleepy, I tell you."

Espalin leaped up, snarling.

"Say! You lukeing for troubles, maybe? Bell, I theenk thees _hombre_
got a gun. Shall we freesk him?"

As he flung the query over his shoulder his beady little eyes did not
leave Pringle's.

Bell Applegate got leisurely to his feet--a tall man, well set up,
with a smooth-shaved, florid face and red hair.

"If he has we'll jack him in the jug." He threw back the lapel of his
coat, displaying a silver star.

"But I ain't got no gun," protested John Wesley meekly. "You-all can
see for yourself."

"We will--don't worry! Don't you make one wrong move or I'll put out
your light!"

"Be you the sheriff?"

"Police. Go to him, Ben!"

"No gun," reported Ben after a swift search of the shrinking captive.

"I done told you so, didn't I?"

"Mighty good thing for you, old rooster. Gun-toting is strictly barred
in Las Uvas. You got to take your gun off fifteen minutes after you
get in from the road and you can't put it on till fifteen minutes
before you take the road again."

"Is that--er--police regulations or state law?"

"State law--and has been any time these twenty-five years. Say, you
doddering old fool, what do you think this is--a night school?"

"I--I guess I'll go to bed," said Pringle miserably.

"I--I guess if you come back I'll throw you out," mimicked Ben with a
guffaw.

Pringle made no answer. He shuffled into the hall and up the stairway
to his bedroom. He unlocked the door noisily; he opened it noisily;
he took his sixshooter and belt from the wall quietly and closed the
door, noisily again; he locked it--from the outside. Then he did a
curious thing; he sat down very gently and removed his boots.

       *       *       *       *       *

The four in the barroom listened, grinning. When they heard Pringle's
door slam shut Bell Applegate nodded and Creagan went out on the
street. Behind him, at a table near the pool-room door, the law
planned ways and means in a slinking undertone. "You keep in the
background, Joe. Let us do the talking. Foy just naturally despises
you--we might not get him to stay the fifteen minutes out. You stay
back there. Remember now, don't shoot till Ben lets him get his arm
loose. _Sabe_?"

"Maybe Meester Ben don't find heem."

"Oh, yes, he will. Ditch meeting to-night. Ought to be out about now.
Setting the time to use the water and assessing _fatiga_ work. Every
last man with a water right will be there, sure, and Foy's got a
dozen. Max, you are to be a witness, remember, and you mustn't be
mixed up in it. Got your story straight?"

"Foy he comes in and makes a war-talk about Dick Marr," recited Max.
"After we powwow awhile you see his gun. You tell him he's under
arrest for carryin' concealed weapons. You and Ben grabbed his arm; he
jerked loose and went after his gun. And then Joe shot him."

"That's it. We'll all stick to that. S-st! Here they come!"

There are men whose faces stand out in a crowd, men you turn to look
after on the street. Such--quite apart from his sprightly past--was
Christopher Foy, who now entered with Creagan. He was about thirty,
above middle height, every mold and line of him slender and fine and
strong. His face was resolute, vivacious, intelligent; his eyes were
large and brown, pleasant and fearless. A wide black hat, pushed back
now, showed a broad forehead white against crisp coal-black hair and
the pleasant tan of neck and cheek. But it was not his dark, forceful
face alone that lent him such distinction. Rather it was the perfect
poise and balance of the man, the ease and unconscious grace of every
swift and sure motion. He wore a working garb now--blue overalls and a
blue rowdy. But he wore them with an air that made him well dressed.

Foy paused for a second; Applegate rose.

"Well, Chris!" he laughed. "There has been a time when you might not
have fancied this particular bunch--hey? All over now, please the
pigs. Come in and give it a name. Beer for mine."

"I'll smoke," said Foy.

"Me too," said Espalin.

He lit a cigar and returned to his chair. Ben Creagan passed behind
the bar and handed over a sixshooter and a cartridge belt.

"Here, Chris--here's the gun I borrowed of you when I broke mine. Much
obliged."

Foy twirled the cylinder to make sure the hammer was on an empty
chamber and buckled the belt under his rowdy.

"My hardware is mostly plows and scrappers and irrigating hoes
nowadays," he remarked. "Good thing too."

"All the same, Foy, I'd keep a gun with me if I were you. Dick Marr is
drinking again--and when he soaks it up he gets discontented over
old times, you know." Applegate lowered his voice, with a significant
glance at Espalin. "He threatened your life to-day. I thought you
ought to know it."

Foy considered his cigar.

"That's awkward," he replied briefly.

"Chris," said Ben, "this isn't the first time. Dick's heart is bad
to you. I'm sorry. He was my friend and you were not. But you're not
looking for any trouble now. Dick is. And I'm afraid he'll keep on
till he gets it. Me and the sheriff we managed to get him off to bed,
but he says he's going to shoot you on sight--and I believe he means
it. You ought to have him bound over to keep the peace."

Foy smiled and shook his head.

"I can't do that--and it would only make him madder than ever. But
I'll get out of his way and keep out of his way. I'll go up to the
Jornado to-night and stay with the Bar Cross boys awhile. He won't
come up there."

"You'll enjoy having people tellin' how you run away to keep from
meeting Dick Marr?" said Applegate incredulously.

"Why shouldn't they say it? It will be exactly true," responded Foy
quietly, "and you're authorized to say so. I'm learning some sense
now; I'm getting to own quite a mess of property; I'm going to be
married soon; and I don't want to fight anyone. Besides, quite apart
from my own interests, other men will be drawn into it if I shoot it
out with Marr. No knowing where it will stop. No, sir; I'll go punch
cows till Marr quiets down. Maybe it's just the whisky talking. Dick
isn't such a bad fellow when he's not fighting booze. Or maybe he'll
go away. He hasn't much to keep him here."

"Say, I could get a job offered to him out in San Simon," said
Applegate, brightening.

His eye rested on the clock over the long mirror. He stepped over to
the show case, clipped the end from a cigar and obtained a light from
a shapely bronze lady with a torch. When he came back he fell in on
Foy's left; at Foy's right Creagan leaned his elbows on the bar.

"Well, I'm obliged to you, boys," said Foy. "This one's on me. Come
on, Joe--have a hoot."

"Thanks, no," said Espalin. "I not dreenkin' none thees times. Eef I
dreenk some I get full, and loose my job maybe."

"Vichy," said Foy. "Take something yourself, Max."

As Mr. Max poured the drinks an odd experience befell Mr. José
Espalin. His tilted chair leaned against the casing of the
billiard-room door. As Max filled the first glass Espalin became
suddenly aware of something round and hard and cold pressed against
his right temple. Mr. Espalin felt some curiosity, but he sat
perfectly still. The object shifted a few inches; Mr. Espalin
perceived from the tail of his eye the large, unfeeling muzzle of a
sixshooter; beyond it, a glimpse of the forgotten elderly stranger,
Mr. Pringle.

Only Mr. Pringle's fighting face appeared, and that but for a moment;
he laid a finger to lip and crouched, hidden by the partition and by
Espalin's body. Mr. Espalin gathered that Pringle desired no outcry
and shunned observation; he sat motionless accordingly; he felt a hand
at his belt, which removed his gun.

"Happy days!" said Foy, and raised his glass to his lips.

Creagan seized the uplifted wrist with both hands, Applegate pounced
on the other arm. Pringle leaped through the doorway. But something
happened swifter than Pringle's swift rush. Foy's knee shot up to
Applegate's stomach. Applegate fell, sprawling. Foy hurled himself on
Creagan and bore him crashing to the floor. Foy whirled over; he rose
on one hand and knee, gun drawn, visibly annoyed; also considerably
astonished at the unexpected advent of Mr. Pringle. Applegate lay
groaning on the floor. Pringle kicked his gun from the holster and set
foot upon it; one of his own guns covered the bartender and the other
kept watch on Espalin, silent on his still-tilted chair.

"Who're you!" challenged Foy.

"Friend with the countersign. Don't shoot! Don't shoot me, anyhow."

Foy rose from hand and knee to knee and foot. This rescuer, so
opportunely arrived from nowhere, seemed to be an ally. But to avoid
mistakes, Foy's gun followed Pringle's motions, at the same time
willing and able to blow out Creagan's brains if advisable. He also
acquired Creagan's gun quite subconsciously.

"Let me introduce myself, gentlemen," said Pringle. "I'm
Jack-in-a-Pinch, Little Friend of the Under Dog--see Who's This? page
two-thirteen. My German friend, come out from behind that bar--hands
up--step lively! Spot yourself! My Mexican friend, join Mr. Max.
Move, you poisonous little spider--jump! That's better! Gentlemen--be
seated! Right there--smack, slapdab on the floor. Sit down and think.
Say! I'm serious. Am I going to have to kill some few of you just
because you don't know who I am? I'll count three! One! two!--That's
it. Very good--hold that--register anticipation! I am a worldly man,"
said Pringle with emotion, "but this spectacle touches me--it does
indeed!"

"I'll get square with you!" gurgled Applegate, as fiercely as his
breathless condition would permit.

"George--may I call you George? I don't know your name. You may get
square with me, George--but you'll never be square with anyone. You
are a rhomboidinaltitudinous isosohedronal catawampus, George!"

George raved unprintably. He made a motion to rise, but reconsidered
it as he noted the tension of Pringle's trigger finger.

"Don't be an old fuss-budget, George," said Pringle reprovingly.
"Because I forgot to tell you--I've got my gun now--and yours. You
won't need to arrest me, though, for I'm hitting the trail in fifteen
minutes. But if I wasn't going--and if you had your gun--you couldn't
arrest one side of me. You couldn't arrest one of my old boots!
Listen, George! You heard this Chris-gentleman give his reasons for
wanting peace? Yes? Well, it's oh-so-different here. I hate peace! I
loathe, detest, abhor, and abominate peace! My very soul with strong
disgust is stirred--by peace! I'm growing younger every year, I don't
own any property here, I'm not going to be married; I ain't feeling
pretty well anyhow; and if you don't think I'll shoot, try to get
up! Just look as if you thought you wanted to wish to try to make an
effort to get up."

"How--who----" began Creagan; but Pringle cut him short.

"Ask me no more, sweet! You have no speaking part here. We'll do the
talking. I just love to talk. I am the original tongue-tied man; I ebb
and flow. Don't let me hear a word from any of you! Well, pardner?"

Foy, still kneeling in fascinated amaze, now rose. Creagan's nose was
bleeding profusely.

"That was one awful wallop you handed our gimlet-eyed friend," said
Pringle admiringly. "Neatest bit of work I ever saw. Sir, to you! My
compliments!" He placed a chair near the front door and sat down. "I
feel like a lion in a den of Daniels," he sighed.

"But how did you happen to be here so handy?" inquired Foy.

"Didn't happen--I did it on purpose," said John Wesley. "You see,
these four birds tipped their hand. All evening they been instructing
me where I got off. They would-ed I had the wings of a dove, so I
might fly far, far away and be at rest. Now, I put it to you, do I
look like a dove?"

"Not at present," laughed Foy.

"Well, I didn't like it--nobody would. I see there was a hen on, I
knew the lay of the ground from looking after my horse. So I
clomped off to bed, got my good old Excalibur gun--full name X.L.V.
Caliber--slipped off my boots, tippytoed down the back stairs like a
Barred Rock cat, oozed in by the side door--and here I be! I overheard
their pleasant little plan to do you. I meant to do the big rescue
act, but you mobilize too quick for me. All the same, maybe it's as
well I chipped in, because--take a look at them cartridges in your
gun, will you? Your own gun--the one they borrowed from you."

Foy twisted a bullet from a cartridge. There was no powder. The four
men on the floor looked unhappy under his thoughtful eye.

"Nice little plant--what? Do we kill 'em?" said Pringle cheerfully. "I
don't know the rules well enough to break them. What was the big idea?
Was they vexed at you, son?"

"It would seem so," said Foy, smiling. "We had a little war here a
spell back. I suspect they wanted to stir it up again for political
effect. Election this fall."

"And you were not in their party? I see!" said Pringle, nodding
intelligently, "Well, they sure had it fixed to make your side lose
one vote--fixed good and proper. The Ben-boy was to let your right
hand loose and the Joe-boy was to shoot you as you pulled your gun.
Why, if you had lived to make a statement your own story woulda mighty
near let them out."

"I believe that I am greatly obliged to you, sir."

"I believe you are," said Pringle. "And--but, also, I know the two
gentlemen you were drinking with should be very grateful to you. They
had just half a second more to live--and you beat me to it. Too bad!
Well, what next?"

Foy pondered a little.

"I guess I'll go up to the Bar Cross wagon, as I intended, till things
simmer down. The Las Uvas warriors seldom ever bother the Bar Cross
Range. My horse is hitched up the street. How'd you like to go along
with me, stranger? You and me would make a fair-sized crowd."

"I'd like it fine and dandy," said Pringle. "But I got a little visit
to make to-morrow. Maybe I'll join you later. I like Las Uvas," stated
John Wesley, beaming. "Nice, lively little place! I think I'll settle
down here after a bit. Some of the young fellows are shy on good
manners. But I can teach 'em. I'd enjoy it.... Now, let's see: If
you'll hold these lads a few minutes I'll get my boots and saddle up
and bring my horse to the door; then I'll pay Max my hotel bill and
talk to them while you get your horse; and we'll ride together till we
get out in the open. How's that for a lay?"

That was a good lay, it seemed; and it was carried out--with one
addition: After Foy brought his horse he rang Central and called up
the sheriff.

"Hello! That you, Mr. Lisner? This is Kitty Foy," he said sweetly.
"Sheriff, I hate to bother you, but old Nueces River, your chief
of police, is out of town. And I thought you ought to know that the
police force is all balled up. They're here at the Gadsden Purchase.
Bell Applegate is sick--seems to be indigestion; Espalin is having
a nervous spell; and Ben Creagan is bleeding from his happiest vein.
You'd better come see to 'em. Good-by!"

Pringle smiled benevolently from the door.

"There! I almost forgot to tell you boys. We disapprove of your
actions oh-very-much! You know you were doing what was very, very
wrong--like three little mice that were playing in the barn though
the old mouse said: 'Little mice, beware! When the owl comes singing
"Too-whoo" take care!' If you do it again we shall consider it
deliberately unfriendly of you.... Well, I'll toddle my decrepit old
bones out of this. Eleven o'clock! How time has flown, to be sure!
Thank you for a pleasant evening. Good-by, George. Good-by, all! Be
good little boys--go nighty-nighty!"

They raced to the corner, scurried down the first side street, turned
again, and slowed to a gallop. Pringle was in high feather; he caroled
blithesome as he rode:

    _"So those three little owls flew back up in the barn--
      Inky, dinky, doodum, day!
    And they said, 'Those little mice make us feel so nice and warm!'
      Inky, dinky, doodum, day!
    Then they all began to sing, 'Too-whit! Too-who!'
    I don't think much of this song, do you?
    But there's one thing about it--'tis certainly true--
      Inky, dinky, doodum, day!"_

They reached the open; the gallop became a trot.

"I go north here," said Foy at the cross-roads above the town. "Which
way for you?"

"North too," said Pringle. "I don't know just where, but you can tell
me. I go to a railroad station first--Aden. Then to the Vorhis place?"

"Vorhis? I'm going there myself?" said Foy. "You didn't tell me your
name yet."

"Pringle."

"What? Not John Wesley Pringle? Great Scott, man! I've heard Stella
talk about you a thousand times. Say, I'm sure glad to meet you! My
name's Foy--Christopher Foy."

"Why, yes," said Pringle. "I think I've heard Stella speak of you,
too."




Chapter III


Being a child must have been great fun--once. Nowadays one would as
lief be a Strasburg goose. When you and I went to school it was not
quite so bad. True, neither of us could now extract a cube root with
a stump puller, and it is sad to reflect how little call life has made
for duodecimals. Sometimes it seems that all our struggle with moody
verbs and insubordinate conjunctions was a wicked waste--poor little
sleepy puzzleheads! But there were certain joyous facts which we
remember yet. Lake Erie was very like a whale; Lake Ontario was a
seal; and Italy was a boot.

The great Chihuahuan desert is a boot too; a larger boot than Italy.
The leg of it is in Mexico, the toe is in Arizona, the heel in New
Mexico; and the Jornado is in the boot-heel.

El Jornado del Muerto--the Journey of the Dead Man! From what dim old
legend has the name come down? No one knows. The name has outlived the
story.

Perhaps some grim, hard-riding Spaniard made his last ride here; weary
at last of war, turned his dead face back to Spain and the pleasant
valleys of his childhood. We have a glimpse of him, small in the
mighty silence; his faithful few about him, with fearful backward
glances; a gray sea of waving grama breaking at their feet; the great
mountains looking down on them. Plymouth Rock is unnamed yet.--Then
the mist shuts down.

The Santa Fé Trail reaches across the Jornado; tradition tells of
vague, wild battles with Apache and Navajo; there are grave-cairns
on lone dim ridges, whereon each passer casts a stone. Young mothers
dreamed over the cradles of those who now sleep here, undreaming; here
is the end of all dreams.

Doniphan passed this way; Kit Carson rode here; the Texans journeyed
north along that old road in '62--to return no more.

These were but passers-by. The history of the Jornado, of indwellers
named and known, begins with six Americans, as follows: Sandoval, a
Mexican; Toussaint, a Frenchman; Fest, a German; Martin, a German;
Roullier, a Swiss; and Teagardner, a Welshman.

You might have thought the Jornado a vast and savage waste or a
pleasant place and a various. That depended upon you. Materials for
either opinion were plenty; lava flow, saccaton flats, rolling sand
hills sage-brush, mesquite and yucca, bunch grass and shallow lakes,
bench and hill, ridge and groundswell and wandering draw; always the
great mountains round about; the mountains and the warm sun over all.

A certain rich man desired to be President--to please his wife,
perhaps. He was a favorite son sure of his home-state vote in any
grand old national convention. He gave largely to charities and
campaign funds, and his left hand would have been justly astonished to
know what his right hand was about.

Those were bargain-counter days. Fumbling the wares, our candidate
saw, among other things, that New Mexico had six conventional votes:
He sent after them.

So the Bar Cross Cattle Company was founded; range, the Jornado. Our
candidate provided the money and a manager, also ambidextrous with
instructions to get those votes and incidentally to double the money,
as a good and faithful manager should.

He got the six votes, but our candidate never became president.
Poor fellow, his millions could not bring him happiness. He died, an
embittered and disappointed man, in the obscurity of the United States
Senate.

The Bar Cross brand was the sole fruit of that ambition. Other ranches
had dwindled or vanished; favored by environment the Bar Cross, almost
alone, withstood the devastating march of progress. It was still a
mark of distinction to be a Bar Cross man. The good old customs--and
certain bad old customs, too--still held on the Bar Cross Range, fifty
miles by one hundred, on the Jornado. Scattered here and there were
smaller ranches: among them the V H--the Vorhis Ranch.

Stella Vorhis and John Wesley, far out on the plain, rode through
the pleasant afternoon. The V H. Ranch was in sight now, huddled
low before them; beyond, a cluster of low hills rose from the plain,
visible center of a world fresh, eager, and boundless.

The girl's eye kindled with delight as it sought the far horizons,
the misty parapets gleaming up through the golden air; she was one
who found dear and beautiful this gray land, silent and ensunned. She
flung up her hand exultingly.

"Isn't it wonderful, John Wesley? Do you know what it makes me think
of? This:

    _"'... Magic casements, opening on the foam
      Of perilous seas, in faëry lands forlorn!'_

"Think, John! This country hasn't changed a bit since the day Columbus
set out from Spain."

"How true! Fine old bird, Columbus--he saw America first. Great head
he showed, too, getting himself named Christopher. Otherwise you might
have said, 'the day Antony discovered Cleopatra'--or something like
that. Wise old Chris!"

Stella's eyes narrowed reflectively.

"John Wesley, you've been reading! You never used to know anything
about Mark Antony."

"I cribbed that remark from Billy Beebe and he swiped it from a
magazine. I don't know much about Mark, even this very yet. Good old
easy Mark!"

"That's the how of it. You've been absorbing knowledge from those
pardners of yours. Your talk shows it. You're changed a lot--that way.
Every other way you're the same old Wes!"

"Now, that sounds better!" said Pringle in his most complacent tones.
"I want to talk about myself, always, Stella May Vorhis; we've come
thirty miles and I've heard Christopher Foy, Foy, Foy, all the way!
It's exasperating! It's sickening!"

But Stella was not to be flustered. She held her head proudly.

"It's you that have been talking about him. I told you you'd like him,
John Wesley."

"Yes, you did--and I do. He's a self-starter. He's a peppermist. He's
a regular guy. It wasn't only the way he smashed those thugs--taken
by surprise and all--but that he had judgment enough not to shoot when
there was no need for it; that's what gets me! And then he went and
spoiled it all."

"How?"

"Hiking on up to the ranch with the Major, without even waking you up.
Why, if it was me, do you s'pose I'd leave another man--no matter how
old and safe he was--to tell such a story as that his own way and hog
all the credit for himself? That Las Uvas push is a four-flush--he
needn't stir a peg for them. No, sir! I'd have stayed right there till
you got ready to come--and every time I'd narrate that tale about the
scrap it would get scarier and scarier."

"I know, without telling, what my Chris does is the brave thing, the
best thing," said the girl, with softly shining eyes. "And he
never brags--any more than you do, Wes. You're always making fun of
yourself. And I'm afraid you don't know how serious a menace this Las
Uvas gang is. It isn't what Chris may do or may not do. All they want
is a pretext. Why, John, there are men down there who are really
quite truthful--as men go--till they get on the witness stand. But the
minute they're under oath they begin to lie. Force of habit, I guess.
The whole courthouse ring hates Chris and fears him--especially Matt
Lisner, the sheriff. In the old trouble, whenever he was outwitted or
outfought, Chris did it. Besides----" She paused; the color swept to
her cheek.

"Besides--you. Yes, yes," grumbled Pringle. "Might have been expected.
These women! Does the Foy-boy know?"

"He knows that Lisner wanted to marry me," said Stella. Neck and cheek
were crimson now; but it was characteristic that her level eyes met
Pringle's fearlessly. "But before that--he--he persecuted me, John.
Chris must not know. He would kill him. But I wanted you to know in
case anything happened to Chris. There is nothing they will stick at,
these men. Lisner is the vilest; he hates Chris worst of all." She was
in deep distress; there were tears in her eyes as she smiled at him.
"And I wish--oh, John Wesley, you don't know how I wish you were
staying here--dear old friend!"

"As a dear and highly valuable old friend," said Pringle sedately,
"let me point out how shrewd and sensible a plan it would be for you
and your Chris to go on a honeymoon at once--and never come back."

"I am beginning to think so. Up to last night I had only my fears to
go on."

"But now you know. We managed to make a joke of last night--but what
that push had in mind was plain murder. I would dearly like," said
John Wesley, "to visit Las Uvas--some dark night--in a Zeppelin."

       *       *       *       *       *

At the corral gate the Major met them, with a face so troubled that
Stella cried out in alarm:

"Father! What is it? Chris?"

"Stella--be brave! Dick Marr was killed at midnight--and they're
swearing it off on Chris."

"But John Wesley was with him."

"That's just it. Applegate and Creagan tell it that they saw Chris
leaving town at eleven o'clock, that he said he was coming up here,
and that he made a war-talk about Marr. But not a word about Pringle
or the fight at the hotel. Joe Espalin doesn't appear--no claim that
he saw Foy at all."

"That looks ugly," observed Pringle.

"Ugly! Your testimony is to be thrown out as a lie made of whole
cloth. Espalin and the barkeeper don't appear. They're afraid the
Mexican will get tangled up, and Max will swear he didn't see Chris at
all. It's cut and dried. You are to be canceled. Marr was found this
morning at the first crossroad above town. His watch was stopped at
ten minutes to twelve--mashed, it seemed, where it hit on a stone when
he fell. If they had told about the mix-up with you and Chris last
night, I might have thought they really believed Chris killed Marr--or
suspected it. As it stands, we know the whole thing is a black, rotten
conspiracy."

"But where's Chris?" demanded Stella, trembling.

"We have none of us seen Chris--you want to remember that. You won't
have to lie, Stella--you didn't see him. Pringle, I bank on you."

"Sure! I can lie and stick to it, though I'm sadly out of practice,"
said Pringle. "But hadn't we better fix up the same history to tell?
And where's your man Hargis that stays here? Will he do?"

"Unsaddle and I'll tell you. We've only got a few minutes. I saw the
dust of them coming down from the north as I drove in this bunch
of saddle horses. Some of them went up by train to Upham, you know.
Hargis has gone to the round-up, and I'm just as well pleased. I'm not
sure he can be trusted. We are to know not the first word of what has
happened. We haven't seen Chris and haven't heard of the murder. Come
in--we'll start dinner and be taken by surprise. Pringle, throw your
gun over on the bunk. Stella, get that look off your face. After you
hear the news you can look any old way and it'll be natural enough.
But you've got to be unconcerned and unsuspicious when they first
come."

He started a fire. Stella set about preparing dinner.

"Who brought the news?" she asked.

"Joe Cowan--and a relay. Someone rode to Jeff Isaack's ranch as fast
as ever a horse could go. Jeff came to Quartzite; Dodd passed the word
on to Goldenburg's and Cowan came here. At every ranch they drove
all the fresh saddle horses out of the way, so a posse couldn't get a
remount without losing time. Kitty Foy has got good friends, and they
don't believe he'd shoot any man in the back."

"And Foy's drifted with Cowan?"

"He hadn't a chance to get clear," said the Major. "We had no fresh
horses here. They've sworn in a small army of deputies. Nearly a
hundred men are out hunting for him by this time. One posse was to go
up the San Andres on the east, leaving a man at every waterhole. The
sheriff wired for a special train, took a carload of saddle horses
and dropped a couple of men off at every station. At Upham the rest
of them were to unload and string out across the Jornado, so as to
cut Chris off from the Bar Cross round-up at Alaman. It's some of that
bunch I saw coming, I guess. And the others were to scatter out and
come up the middle of the plain. They'll drag the Jornado with a
fine-toothed comb."

"How's he to get away, then?"

"Cowan took Kit's horse and led his own, which was about give out. He
turned back east, up a draw where he won't be seen unless somebody's
right on top of him. Eight or ten miles out he'll turn Foy's horse
loose; he'll carry the extra saddle on a ways and drop it in a
washout. They'll find Foy's horse and think he's roped a fresh one.
Then Cowan will start up a fresh bunch of mares and raise big dust. He
will ride straight to the first posse he sees, cla