Copyright (C) 2018 by David Wyllie.



This translation is licensed under the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License,
which appears below and may be found online at
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/


			      SIDDHARTHA
			   A poem of India

by Hermann Hesse

Translated into English by David Wyllie


PART ONE

Dedicated to my revered friend, Romain Rolland


THE BRAHMIN’S SON

In the shade of the house, in the sunshine on the river bank where the
boats were, in the shade of the forest of shala trees, in the shade of the
fig tree, this is where Siddhartha grew up, the brahmin’s most handsome
son, the young falcon, alongside his friend Govinda, the brahmin’s son.
His pale shoulders were bronzed by the sunshine on the river bank, when he
was bathing, when performing ceremonious ablutions, when making holy
sacrifices. Shadow flowed into his dark eyes in the mango groves, when
playing boyish games, when his mother sang, when he talked with the wise
ones. Siddhartha spent many hours in conversation with the wise ones, he
practised his skills of rhetoric with Govinda, practised the art of
thought with Govinda, in order to achieve mystic contemplation. He was
already able to utter the holy word, Om, in silence, the word of words, in
silence to utter it and draw it in with his breath, in silence to utter it
and send it out with his breath, his mind collected, his brow surrounded
with the light of the clear-thinking soul. He was already able to
understand, in his innermost being, the nature of Atman, indestructible,
at one with the universe.

Joy sprang up in his father’s heart when he saw his son, the learned
one, the one with a thirst for knowledge, joy sprang up when he foretold
that he would grow into a wise man and a priest, a prince among the
brahmins.

Bliss sprang up in his mother’s breast when she saw her son, when she
saw him walk, when she saw him sit down and stand up, Siddhartha, the
strong one, the handsome one, walking on his slender legs, when, with
perfect decorum, he her offered her his greetings.

Love was stirred in the hearts of the brahmins’ daughters when they saw
Siddhartha walk through the streets of the town, his luminous brow, the
eyes of a king, his narrow hips.

But the one who loved him more than all the others was Govinda, his
friend, the brahmin’s son. He loved Siddhartha’s eyes and his noble
voice, he loved his walk and the perfect grace of his movements, he loved
everything that Siddhartha did or said, and most of all he loved his soul,
his lofty and fiery thoughts, the bright glow of his will, his lofty
vocation. Govinda knew that Siddhartha would never become a mediocre
brahmin, no lazy officiator of sacrifices, no greedy peddler of magic
spells, no rhetorician of vain and empty speech, no sly or malevolent
priest, and also never become a good but stupid sheep in the flock of
many. No, and he too, Govinda, had no wish to become one such, not one of
those brahmans that are numbered in their thousands. He wanted to be a
follower of Siddhartha, the beloved, the noble. And if Siddhartha ever
became a god, if he ever went to join the luminous ones, then Govinda
would follow him, as his friend, as his companion, as his servant, as his
spear carrier, his shadow.

Everyone loved Siddhartha in the same way. To everyone he brought joy.

To himself, though, Siddhartha did not bring joy. Wandering between the
roses in the fig garden, sitting in the bluish shade in the grove of
contemplation, washing his limbs in his daily act of atonement, performing
sacrifice in the dark shade of the mango wood, all his movements as they
should be, loved by all, joy to all, he nonetheless carried no joy in his
own heart. Tears came to him, restless thoughts came to him from the water
of the river as it flowed, from the stars of the night as they sparkled,
from the rays of the Sun as they blazed, dreams came to him and a
restlessness of the soul, from the smoke of his sacrifices, from the
verses of the Rig Veda as he breathed them, from the teachings of the
ancient brahmins as they seeped into him.

Siddhartha had begun to nurture discontent in himself. He had begun to
feel that his father’s love, and his mother’s love, and the love of
his friend, Govinda, would not always and for all time bring him
happiness, calm him, satisfy him, be enough for him. He had begun to see
that his venerable father and his other teachers, the wise brahmins, had
already given him almost all of their wisdom, all the best of their
wisdom, that their fullness had already been poured into his vessel,
receptive and ready to accept it, and that the vessel was not full, the
spirit was not satisfied, the soul was not quieted, the heart was not at
peace. The washings were good, but they were water, they did not wash sins
away, they did not assuage the thirst of the soul, they did not dispel the
pain of the heart. Most important of all were the sacrifices and the call
of the gods - but was that all? Did the sacrifices bring happiness? And
how did the gods feel about that? Was it really Prajapati who had created
the world? Was it not Atman, him, the only one, the all-in-one? Were the
gods not forms that had been created like you and me, subject to time,
mortal? So was it good to make sacrifice to the gods, was it proper, was
it a meaningful and elevated act? Whom else would you make sacrifice to,
whom else should you offer your veneration to other than Him, the one and
only, Atman? And where was Atman to be found, where did He live, where did
His eternal heart beat, where else but in the Self, in the Deepest, in the
Indestructible that every man carried in himself? But where, where was
this Self, this Deepest, this Ultimate? It was not made of flesh and bone,
it was not thought or consciousness, that is was the wisest men taught.
Where, where was it then? To pierce through to the Self, to me, to Atman -
was there any other way worth seeking out? But no-one showed him this way,
no-one knew it, not his father, not his teachers or the wise men, not the
sacred songs of sacrifice! They knew everything, the brahmins and their
holy books, knew everything, they had made great efforts into everything
and into more than everything, the creation of the world, the origins of
speech, food, breathing in and breathing out, the hierarchy of sins, the
acts of the gods - their knowledge was boundless - but was it worth
knowing all of this when there was one single thing they did not know, the
thing of highest importance, the only thing of importance?

It was true that many verses in the holy scriptures, magnificent verses
such as the Upanishads of the Samaveda, spoke of this deepest and ultimate
thing. “Your soul is the entire world,” was written there, and it was
written that man in his sleep, deep sleep, enters into his deepest part
and lives in Atman. Great wisdom was written in these verses, all the
knowledge of the wisest was collected here and presented in words of
magic, as pure as the honey collected from the bees. No, the enormous
amount of knowledge here, assembled and preserved through countless
generations of wise brahmins, was not to be under-valued. - but where were
the brahmins, where were the priests, where were the wise men and the
penitents who had succeeded not only in learning this deepest wisdom but
in living it? Where was the gifted one who, by his magic, would draw the
essence of Atman out of its sleep and make it alert, something that was
alive in its coming and going, in word and deed? Siddhartha knew many
venerable brahmins, most of all he knew his father, the pure one, the
learned one, the most venerable of all. His father was an admirable man,
quiet and noble in his manner, pure his life, wise his words, in his brow
lived fine and noble thoughts - but even he, who had so much knowledge;
Did he live in holiness, was he at peace, was he, too, not just another
seeker, just another thirsty one? Did he not, over and again, need to go
to the well to assuage his thirst, did he not need to make sacrifice, read
books and debate his beliefs with the brahmins? Why did he, the immaculate
one, need to wash his sins away every day, strive to become pure every
day, every day again and again? Was Atman not a part of him, did the
source not flow into his heart? The source of all things had to be found,
the source within us all, it had to be taken into ourselves! All else was
mere seeking, mere straying from the path, mere delusion.

These were the thoughts of Siddhartha, this was his thirst, this was his
sorrow.

He would often recite the words from one of the Chandogya Upanishads:
“Forsooth, the name of Brahman is Satyam - forsooth, he who knows such
things goeth daily into the world of Heaven.” The world of Heaven often
seemed near to him, but he had never quite been able to reach it, never
been able to quench the ultimate thirst. And from all the wise men he
knew, even from the wisest of all, whose teachings he enjoyed, there was
not one who ever had quite reached it, the world of Heaven, which would
have quenched the ultimate thirst for him.

“Govinda,” said Siddhartha to his friend, “Govinda, dear friend,
come with me under the banyan tree, we have to nurture our skill of
contemplation.”

They went to the Banyan tree, they sat down beneath it, Siddhartha here
and, twenty paces away, sat Govinda. As he sat down in preparedness to
utter the word ‘Om,’ Siddhartha repeatedly muttered the verse:

  Om is the bow, the arrow is the soul,
  Brahman is the arrow’s goal,
  The goal to reach directly.

After they had practised contemplation for their usual length of time
Govinda stood. The evening had come, it was time to wash in preparation
for the evening. He called out Siddhartha’s name. Siddhartha gave no
answer. Siddhartha sat deep in contemplation, his eyes were fixed on a
greatly distant object, the tip of his tongue protruded slightly from
between his teeth, he seemed not to be breathing. So he sat, engrossed in
contemplation, his mind fixed on Om, his soul as the arrow sent out to
Brahman.

One day samanas came through the town where Siddhartha lived, travelling
ascetics, three men wizened and close to death, neither old nor young,
their shoulders were bloody and dusty, they were nearly naked and they
were scorched by the sun, an air of loneliness about them, alien to this
world and the enemy of the world, strangers, emaciated jackals in the
empire of man. The odour of quiet suffering blew in from behind them, of
service that destroyed, of pitiless loss of self.

That evening, after their hour of contemplation, Siddhartha said to
Govinda, “Tomorrow morning, my friend, Siddhartha will go to the
samanas. He will become a samana.”

When Govinda heard these words and saw the unshakable resolution in his
friend’s face he turned pale. Siddhartha could no more be dissuaded from
his course than the arrow speeding from the bow. Just as soon as he saw
this, Govinda knew that this was where it started, Siddhartha would now go
on his way, now his destiny would begin to grow, and with Siddhartha’s
destiny so would Govinda’s. And he became as pale as a dried banana
skin.

Oh, Siddhartha,” he exclaimed, “will your father allow that?”

Siddhartha looked back at him as one who was awakening. With the speed of
an arrow he saw the fear, saw the resignation in Govinda’s soul.

“Oh, Govinda,” he said gently, “let us not waste words. Tomorrow, at
the break of day, I will embark on the life of a samana. Let us talk no
more about it.”

Siddhartha went into the room where his father sat on a raffia mat and
stood behind him until his father could feel that he was there. The
brahmin said, “Is that you, Siddhartha? Say what it is you have come to
tell me.”

Siddhartha answered, “If you will allow it, father, I have come to tell
you that I have been called on to leave your house in the morning and to
go among the ascetics. It is my vocation to become a samana. I hope my
father will not be opposed to this.”

The brahmin was silent, and remained silent so long that, before the
silence in the room came to an end, the stars outside the little window
had moved across the sky and formed new shapes. His son remained there,
speechless and immobile, his arms crossed, the father sat there on the
mat, speechless and immobile, while the stars made their way across the
sky. Finally, Siddhartha’s father spoke. “It is not seemly for a
brahmin to speak loud and angry words, but my heart is moved to oppose
this. I do not want to hear this request from your mouth a second time.”

Slowly, the brahmin got to his feet, Siddhartha stood in silence, his arms
crossed.

“What are you waiting for?” his father asked.

Siddhartha said, “You know what I am waiting for.”

Displeased, his father left the room, displeased he went to his bed and
lay himself down.

An hour passed, as no sleep came to his eyes, the brahmin stood up, paced
to and fro, left the house. He looked in through the little window of the
room, there he saw Siddhartha standing, his arms crossed, unchanged. His
upper clothing shone palely. Unease in his heart, Siddhartha’s father
went back to his bed.

Another hour passed, as no sleep came to his eyes, the brahmin stood up
again, paced to and fro, went to the front of the house, saw that the moon
had risen. He looked in through the little window of the room, there he
saw Siddhartha standing, resolute, his arms crossed, moonlight reflecting
from his bare legs. With worry in his heart, Siddhartha’s father went
back to his bed.

He came again after an hour, and came again after two hours, looked in at
the little window, saw Siddhartha standing there, in the moonlight, in the
starlight, in the darkness. He came again hour after hour, in silence,
looked into the room, saw the resolute one standing there, it filled his
heart with anger, filled his heart with anxiety, filled his heart with
doubts, filled it with sorrow.

And in the last hour of the night, before the day began, he went back
again, entered the room, saw the young man standing there. He seemed great
to him, and like a stranger.

“Siddhartha,” he said, “what is it you are waiting for?”

“You know what I am waiting for.”

“Will you persist in standing like this and waiting until day comes,
midday comes, evening comes?”

“I will stand and wait.”

“You will become tired, Siddhartha.”

“I will become tired.”

“You will fall asleep, Siddhartha.”

“I will not fall asleep.”

“You will die, Siddhartha.”

“I will die.”

“And would you rather die than do as your father tells you?”

“Siddhartha has always done as his father has told him.”

“So will you give up this idea?”

“Siddhartha will do as his father says.”

The first rays of daylight fell into the room. The brahmin saw that
Siddhartha’s knees were trembling slightly. He saw no tremble in
Siddhartha’s face, his eyes fixed on the far distance. Then his father
realised that Siddhartha was no longer with him in his native country,
that he had already left him.

His father touched Siddhartha’s shoulder.

“You will go into the woods and become a samana,” he said. “If you
find holiness in the woods come and teach me about holiness. If you find
disappointment come back and we can make sacrifices to the gods together
again. Now go and kiss your mother, tell her where you’re going. For me,
it is time now to go down to the river and start the first washing of the
day.”

He took his hand off his son’s shoulder and went out. Siddhartha
staggered to one side as he tried to walk. He forced his limbs to do as he
wanted, bowed to his father and went to his mother to do as his father had
told him.

The town, in the light of early morning, was still quiet as Siddhartha
walked out of it, moving slowly on his stiff legs. As he passed the last
hut a shadow rose from where it had been crouching and approached the
pilgrim - Govinda.

“You have come,” said Siddhartha with a smile.

“I have come,” said Govinda.


AMONG THE SAMANAS

They reached the samanas that evening, the emaciated samanas, and offered
them their company and their obedience. They were accepted.

Siddhartha had given his coat to a poor brahmin on the way there. All he
wore now were his loin cloth and an earth coloured, untailored cloak. He
ate just once a day and never had cooked food. He fasted for fifteen days.
He fasted for twenty-eight days. The flesh disappeared from his limbs and
his cheeks. Feverish dreams flickered from his bulging eyes, the nails
grew long on his desiccated fingers, a dry, unkempt beard. When he
encountered a woman his eyes became icy; his mouth twitched with contempt
when he entered a town and saw the people in their fine clothes. He saw
businessmen doing business, he saw noblemen go hunting, he saw the
bereaved grieving for their dead, whores offering their bodies, doctors
taking care of the sick, priests saying when to sow crops, lovers loving,
mothers feeding their babies - and none of this was worth a glance from
him, all was lies, everything stank, everything stank of lies, everything
made a pretence of good sense and happiness and beauty, all was in decay
and none could see it. The world tasted bitter. Life was a torment.

Siddhartha had but one objective: to empty himself, to empty himself of
thirst, of desire, of dreams, empty himself of joy and sorrow. To die away
from himself, to no longer be himself, to find peace by emptying his own
heart, to stand open to the miracle by alienating his own thoughts, that
was his objective. Once the whole of his self had been overcome and
destroyed, once every need and every drive of his heart was silent, that
was when the ultimate had to wake, the deepest part of his being, that
which is no longer the self, the great secret.

Siddhartha stood silent in the vertical glare of the Sun, aglow with pain,
aglow with thirst, and he stood there till he no longer felt pain nor
thirst. He stood silent in the time of rains with the water flowing from
his hair onto his icy cold shoulders, over his icy cold hips and legs, and
the penitent remained standing there till his shoulders and his legs no
longer felt icy cold, till they became silent, till they were at peace. He
crouched silent in the thorny bushes, blood dropping from his burning
skin, pus dropping from his wounds, and Siddhartha remained rigid,
remained motionless, till the blood no longer flowed, till the thorns no
longer pierced his skin, till nothing more burned him.

Siddhartha sat up straight and learned to control his breath, learned to
need little air, learned to stop his breath. He learned, starting with his
breath, to still the beats of his heart, learned to reduce the beats of
his heart till they became fewer and then till there were almost none.

Siddhartha was taught by the eldest of the samanas, he trained in losing
the self, he trained in contemplation, learned new samana rules. A heron
flew out of the bamboo forest - and Siddhartha took the heron into his
soul, he flew over the woods and mountains, he was a heron, he ate fish,
he hungered as a heron hungers, he spoke the heron language, he died the
death of a heron. A dead jackal lay on the sand by the water, and
Siddhartha’s soul slipped into the corpse, he was entirely a jackal, he
lay on the shore, he bloated with gas, he stank, he decayed, he was torn
apart by hyenas, he lost his skin to the vultures, he became a skeleton,
became dust, blew in the wind that crossed the meadows. And Siddhartha’s
soul came back to him, died, decayed, crumbled, it had tasted the dark
inebriation of the circle of life, again endured thirst like the hunter in
the wasteland where the circle of life might be left behind, where cause
and effect ended, where eternity without pain began. He brought death to
his senses, brought death to his memory, slipped out of his own self and
into a thousand alien forms, he was an animal, was carrion, was stone, was
wood, was water, and each time found himself ever more aware, light of sun
or moon, became again himself, swang in the circle, felt thirst, overcame
the thirst, felt the thirst anew.

Among the samanas Siddhartha learned many things, he learned many ways to
leave his self behind. He learned the way of self-alienation by pain, by
voluntary suffering and how to overcome pain, hunger, thirst, fatigue. He
travelled on the way of self-alienation by meditation, by removing from
his thoughts any sense that he was perceiving what presented itself to
him. This he learned, and he learned many other ways to travel, he left
his self behind a thousand times, he persisted in the not-self for hours,
for days. But although these ways led him away from his self they always,
at the end, led him back to it. Siddhartha fled from his self a thousand
times, spent time in nothingness, in the animal, in a stone, but he was
never able to prevent his return, the hour of his return was not
avoidable, and he would find himself, once again, in the light of the sun
or the moon, in shade or in rain, and Siddhartha and his self were there
once again, once again the suffering of the circle of life was placed upon
him.

At his side lived Govinda, his shadow, travelling the same road,
undergoing the same trials. They seldom spoke to each other, only when it
was needed for their service and their exercises. At times they would go
together to the villages in order to beg for food for themselves and their
teachers.

“What do you think, Govinda,” Siddhartha once asked him as they were
on their way to beg. “Do you think we have made any progress? Have we
reached any of our targets?”

Govinda answered, “We have learned things, and we continue to learn. You
will be a great samana, Siddhartha. You have learned every exercise very
quickly, and the old samanas have been amazed at you. One day, Siddhartha,
you will be a holy man.”

Siddhartha said, “That is not how I see it, my friend. All that I have
learned so far I could have learned much faster and much easier in any bar
where the whores are, my friend, among all the cheats and the gamblers.”

Govinda said, “That is what you say, my friend, but you know that
Siddhartha is not some cattle driver, and that a samana is not some
drunkard. The drunk can numb his senses, he can find escape and rest for a
short time, but then he comes back from his stupor and finds that all is
as it was before. He makes himself no wiser, he has gathered no knowledge
any sort, he has climbed not one step higher.”

Siddhartha smiled and said, “I don’t know, I’ve never been a
drunkard. But I do know that in all my exercises and contemplations I have
only ever found a brief respite from suffering, and remained just as far
away from wisdom and liberation as a child in its mother’s womb. I do
know that, Govinda, I do know that.”

Another time, when Siddhartha and Govinda came out of the woods together
and down to the village to beg for food for their brothers and teachers,
Siddhartha began to speak and said, “What about now, Govinda, do you
think we are on the right path? Are we getting any closer to knowledge?
Are we getting any closer to liberation? Or are we just going round in
circles - we, who are trying to escape the circle of life?”

Govinda said, “We have learnt many things, Siddhartha, and there is
still a lot more to learn. We are not going round in circles, we are
mounting higher, the circle is a spiral, we have already climbed up many
steps.”

Siddhartha answered, “How old do you think our eldest samana is, our
venerable teacher?”

Govinda said, “He must be about sixty, our eldest samana.”

And Siddhartha, “He has reached the age of sixty, and he still has not
reached Nirvana. He will be seventy, and then eighty, and you and me, we
will become old in the same way and we will do our exercises, and we will
fast, and we will meditate. But we will never reach Nirvana, he will not,
we will not. Govinda, of all the samanas that there are, I do not think
any one of them is likely to reach Nirvana. We find consolation, we find
respite from pain, we learn the skills with which we deceive ourselves.
But that which is essential, the way of ways, that is what we are not
finding.”

“Do not utter such shocking words, Siddhartha!” said Govinda. “We
are among so many learned men, so many brahmins, so many strict and
venerable samanas, so many seekers, so many who strive with such effort,
so many holy men; how could it be that none of these finds the way of
ways?”

But Siddhartha replied in a voice that was sad as much as it was mocking,
a gentle voice, a somewhat sad voice, somewhat mocking, “Soon now,
Govinda, your friend will be leaving the way of the samanas along which he
has travelled so far with you. I suffer from thirst, Govinda, and my
thirst has not become any the less on this long way of the samanas. I have
always been thirsty for knowledge, always been full of questions. I
questioned the brahmins year after year, I sought knowledge in the holy
vedas year after year, and I put questions to the pious samanas year after
year. Perhaps, Govinda, it would have been just as good, just as clever
and just as healing to go and put questions to the rhinoceros birds or the
chimpanzees. I have taken much time to learn this, Govinda, and I am still
not at the end of it, I have learned that learning is impossible! I
believe that in fact there is nothing in anything that we could call
‘learning.’ There is only a kind of knowledge that is everywhere, my
friend, and that is Atman. Atman is in me and in everything else that has
existence. And so now I am beginning to believe that this knowledge has no
worse enemy than the pursuit of knowledge, than learning.”

At this, Govinda stopped walking, raised his hands and said,
“Siddhartha, please do not make your friend anxious with talk like this!
What you are saying really does make me anxious in my heart. Think what
you are saying; where would that leave the holiness of prayer, where would
that leave the dignity of being a brahmin, where would that leave the
holiness of the samanas if it were as you say, if it were not possible
ever to learn?! Siddhartha, where would that leave anything on Earth that
is holy or valuable or venerable?!”

Govinda quietly muttered a verse, a verse from one of the Upanishads:

The purest soul that deeply thinks and sinks itself in Atman, His blessed
heart will have no words to tell it to the world.

Siddhartha, though, remained silent. He thought about the words that
Govinda had just said to him, he thought about the words to their end.

Yes, he thought as he stood there with his head lowered, what would be
left of all the things that seem holy to us? What would remain? What would
be preserved? And he shook his head.

At an earlier time, when the two young men had lived with the samanas, and
performed their exercises together for about three years, there came to
them through many ways and turnings a message, a rumour, saying; One has
appeared that will be called Gotama, the noble one, the buddha. He will
have overcome the pain of the world in himself and brought the wheel of
rebirth to a halt. With his followers he travels through the land,
teaching as he goes, without property, without a home, without a wife,
wearing the yellow garb of an ascetic but with joy on his brow, a holy
man, and brahmans and princes bow their knee to him and become his pupils.

This legend, this rumour, this folk tale sounded out, raised itself like a
scent far and wide, brahmins spoke of it in the cities, samanas spoke of
it in the woods, the name of Gotama, the buddha, was repeated over and
again in the ears of the young, in the good and in the evil, in praise and
in contempt.

As when the plague is raging through a country and a rumour arises that
somewhere there is a man, a wise man, a knowledgeable man whose word and
whose breath alone is enough to heal anyone afflicted with it, when this
rumour spreads through the land and all are talking of it, many believe
it, many doubt it, but many set themselves straight on the road to seek
out this wise man who can help them, so it was with the fragrant rumour of
Gotama, the buddha, the wise man from the line of the sakyas. He
possessed, so the believers said, the highest enlightenment, he remembered
his previous lives, he had attained nirvana and would never more come back
to the cycle of rebirth, never more submerge in the dark waters that
carried the forms of the lower world. Many things majestic and incredible
were reported of him, he had performed miracles, had overcome the Devil,
had spoken with the gods. His enemies, however, and those who did not
believe, said that this Gotama was a vain seducer, he spent his days in
comfort, despised the acts of sacrifice, was without learning and
performed neither exercise nor self-castigation.

Sweet was this legend of the buddha, magical was the aroma of these
rumours. Diseased was the world, hard to bear was life - and look, there
appeared to flow water from a new spring, a call of good news seemed to be
heard, reassuring, mild, and full of noble promises. Everywhere that the
rumour of the buddha was heard, in every part of the lands of India, the
young men listened, felt longing, felt hope, and every pilgrim or stranger
who came to the sons of brahmins in the towns and villages with news of
him, the noble one, the sakyamuni, was welcome.

This legend even penetrated into the woods where the samanas lived, even
to Siddhartha, even to Govinda, slowly, drop by drop, each drop laden with
hope, each drop laden with doubt. They seldom spoke of it, as the eldest
of the samanas was no friend of this legend. He had been taught that
anyone who seemed to be a buddha had first become an ascetic and lived in
the woods, and only then returned to the world of comfort and gaiety, and
he had no faith in this Gotama at all.

“Siddhartha,” said Govinda to his friend one day. “I was in the
village today and a brahman invited me into his house, and in his house
was a brahmin’s son from Magadha who had seen this buddha with his own
eyes and listened to his teachings. At that, the very breath in my lungs
truly caused me pain and I thought: I too would like, both of us,
Siddhartha and I, would like to experience these teachings, to learn from
the mouth of one who had attained perfection! Tell me, my friend, should
we not go and learn from the mouth of this buddha himself?”

Siddhartha answered, “Oh, Govinda, I had always thought Govinda would
stay with the samanas, it was always my belief that it was his objective
to live to the age of sixty or seventy and always practise the arts and
exercises that the samanas display. But look at me now, I did not know
Govinda well enough, I knew little of his heart. But now, dear friend, now
you want to set out on a new path and go there, where the buddha spreads
his teachings.”

Govinda answered, “You like to laugh at me. I hope you always keep
laughing, Siddhartha! But do you not also feel the desire to hear these
teachings rising within you, the wish to hear what is said? And did you
not once say to me that you would not stay for long among the samanas to
follow their way?”

At this Siddhartha laughed, in his way of laughing that took on a shadow
of sorrow and a shadow of mockery, and said, “Quite right, Govinda, what
you say is quite right, you have remembered it rightly. But maybe you
should also remember something else you heard from me, that I had become
tired and mistrustful of teachings and learning, and that my beliefs have
little faith in the words that come to us from teachers. But anyway, my
friend, I am willing to come and hear these teachings - even though, in my
heart, I think we have already tasted the best fruits of them.”

Govinda answered, “Your readiness brings joy to my heart. But tell me,
how can that be possible? How could the teachings of Gotama have given us
their best fruits even before we have tasted them?”

Siddhartha answered, “Let us enjoy these fruits and wait to see what
happens, Govinda! But we can already be thankful to Gotama in that his
fruits are calling us away from the samanas! Perhaps he has other fruit to
offer, and better fruit my friend. Let us keep peace in our hearts and
wait to see if this is so.”

That very day Siddhartha told the eldest of the samanas of his decision to
leave him. He told him with all the humility and modesty as befits a
junior and a pupil. The samana, however fell into a rage at the young
men’s decision to leave, he raised his voice and used foul language.

Govinda was shocked and embarrassed, but Siddhartha put his mouth to
Govinda’s ear and whispered, “Now I will show the elder that I have
learned something from him.”

Siddhartha stood close in front of the samana, gathered his own spirit,
captured the gaze of the old man with his own gaze, and thereby did he
enthrall him, made him dumb, deprived him of his will, subjected him to
his own will, and without a word he ordered him to do as he commanded. The
old man was unable to speak, unable to move his eyes, unable to direct his
own will, his arms hung loose, he became powerless and was subject to the
magic worked by Siddhartha. Siddhartha’s thoughts overpowered those of
the samana, he had to carry out whatever commands they gave him. And so
the old man bowed down several times, performed gestures of blessing and
humbly stammered out wishes for a good journey. And the young men replied
by thanking him for his prostrations, thanked him for his good wishes and
with those greetings made their departure.

On the way Govinda said, “Oh Siddhartha, you learned more from the
samanas than I had realised. It is not easy, not easy at all, to bewitch
an ancient samana. I am sure that if you had stayed with them you would
soon have learned to walk on water.”

“Why would I want to walk on water?” said Siddhartha. “If the
ancient samanas want to do tricks like that they can keep them!”


GOTAMA

In the city of Savathi every child knew the name of the noble buddha, and
every house was ready to fill the begging bowls of Gotama’s disciples
when they made their silent requests. Near the city was the grove of
Jetavana. This wood had been given to Gotama and his followers by
Anathapindika, a rich businessman who was devoted to the noble one, and it
was the place that Gotama liked to visit most.

All the stories and all the answers that the two young ascetics had heard
in their search for Gotama had directed them to this place. When they
arrived in Savathi they stood at the door of the first house silently
begging for food, which was given them. Siddhartha asked the woman who had
offered them the food:

“Generous lady, we would like to learn where the most venerable one, the
buddha, spends his time, for we are two samanas from the woods and have
come to see him, the perfect one, and to hear the teachings from his
mouth.”

The woman said, “You have certainly arrived at the right place, samanas
from the woods. You should know that Jetavana, the garden of
Anathapindikas, is where the noble one spends his time. You will be able
to spend the night there, pilgrims, as there is even enough room there for
the countless many who flood to this place to hear the teachings from his
mouth.”

This was pleasing news to Govinda, and full of joy he declared, “That is
good, so we have reached our destination and our journey is at its end!
But tell us, mother of pilgrims, do you know him, the buddha, have you
seen him with your own eyes?”

The woman said, “Many have seen him, the noble one. Many times I have
seen him as he went on his way through the streets and alleys, silent in
his yellow robes, silent as he showed his begging bowl at the doors of
houses and, as he left those places, his begging bowl full.”

Govinda listened with joy and wanted to put many questions and to hear
more. But Siddhartha urged that they should go on their way. They said
thank you and left, and had hardly any need to ask the way for many
pilgrims were on their way to Jetavana, as well as monks from Gotama’s
community. They arrived there in the night time, there was a continuous
flow of visitors arriving, calling to each other, talking about who was
looking for shelter and who had found it. The two samanas, used to life in
the woods, found a place to rest quickly and quietly and remained there
till morning.

When the sun rose they were astonished to see the size of the crowd,
believers or the curious, who had spent the night here. Monks in their
yellow robes wandered along all the paths of the beautiful grove, here and
there under the trees sat people deep in meditation or engaged in
spiritual discussion. The shady garden was like a city, full of people
swarming like bees. Most of the monks were leaving with their begging
bowls in order to collect food for midday, when they would have their only
meal of the day. Even the buddha himself, the enlightened one, made a
habit of going out to beg each morning.

Siddhartha saw him, and as quickly as if he had been pointed out by a god,
he knew who it was. He saw him, a slight man in a yellow cloak, making his
quiet way with his begging bowl in his hand.

“Govinda, look!” whispered Siddhartha. “Just there, that is the
buddha.”

Govinda stared at the monk in the yellow robe, indistinguishable from the
hundreds of other monks there. And soon Govinda could see it too: it was
him. And they followed him and kept him in their sight.

The buddha followed his path with humility and deep in thought, the
peaceful expression on his face was neither gay nor sad, it seemed to show
a gentle inward contentment. With a hidden smile, quiet, peaceful, not
unlike a healthy child, the buddha wandered on, wearing his robes and
placing his feet in the same way as all his monks, in the way that was
prescribed. But his face, his gait, his quiet lowered eyes, his hands
hanging quietly from his arms, and even every finger on his quietly
hanging hands spoke of peace, spoke of perfection, sought nothing, copied
nothing, breathed gently with a peace that could not fade, in a light that
could not fade, a peace that could not be touched.

So, Gotama walked on slowly towards the town where he would gather alms,
and the two samanas knew him simply from the perfection of his peace, the
stillness of his form where no searching, no desire, no imitation, no
striving could be seen, only light and peace.

“Today, we will hear the teachings from his own mouth,” said Govinda.

Siddhartha made no answer. He had less curiosity about the teachings, he
did not believe they would teach him anything new, even though, like
Govinda, he had heard many times about what the teachings of this buddha
contained, albeit from the reports he had heard at second or third hand.
But he looked attentively at Gotama’s head, at his shoulders, at his
feet, at his hand as it hung there without moving, and it seemed to him
that every part of every finger of that hand held a lesson, spoke,
breathed, was fragrant and shone with truth. This man, this buddha, was
truthful down to every movement of every finger. This man was holy.
Siddhartha had never felt such veneration for anyone, he had never loved
anyone as much as this man.

The two of them followed the buddha into the town and then they quietly
turned back, as they too hoped to obtain food for themselves before the
end of day. They saw Gotama as he too came back, saw him surrounded by his
followers as they took their meal - what he ate was not enough to feed a
bird - and they saw him withdraw into the shade of the mango trees.

But when evening came, when the heat of the day had lessened and everyone
in the camp became more active and gathered together, they heard the
buddha speak. They heard his voice, and even that was a thing of
perfection, of perfect stillness, of complete peace. Gotama taught the
lesson of suffering, of the origin of suffering, of the way that leads to
the removal of suffering. His speech flowed on, calm, peaceful and clear,
it was. Life was sorrow, the world was full of suffering, but release from
suffering could be found: release would be found by him who followed the
way of the buddha. The noble one spoke in a voice that was gentle but
firm, he taught of the four principal doctrines, he taught of the
eight-fold path, the circle of reincarnation, his voice, clear and quiet,
remained above his listeners like a light, like a star in the firmament.

Night had fallen before the buddha came to the end of his speech. Many
pilgrims came forward and asked to be accepted into his community, sought
refuge in the teachings. Gotama did accept them, with the words, “You
have ingested the teachings well, they were conveyed to you well. Come,
then, among us and walk in holiness, that you may prepare an end to all
sorrow.”

Then Govinda, too, the shy one, was seen to come forward and he said,
“I, too, seek refuge with the noble one and his teachings,” and asked
to be accepted among the buddha’s followers, and he was accepted.

Soon thereafter, as the buddha had withdrawn for his night’s rest,
Govinda went to Siddhartha with great enthusiasm and said, “I am not
entitled to reproach you for anything. We have both heard the noble one,
we have both received his teachings. Govinda heard the teaching, he has
taken refuge in them. But you, revered one, will you not take the path of
liberation? Will you delay, will you continue to wait?”

When he realised what Govinda had said Siddhartha woke as if he had been
sleeping. Then, gently and with no mockery in his voice, he said,
“Govinda, my friend, now you have taken the first step, now you have
chosen your path. You have always been my friend, Govinda, you have always
followed me one step behind. I have often asked myself whether Govinda
would one day take a step of his own, without me, from his own soul. Now
see, you have become a man and chosen your own way. I hope you will follow
it to its end, my friend! I hope you will find liberation!”

Govinda still did not fully understand, and impatiently repeated his
question: “Speak, dear friend, I beg of you, speak! Tell me what cannot
be different, tell me my learned friend that you too will take refuge with
the noble buddha!”

Siddhartha lay his hand on Govinda’s shoulder. “You have failed to
hear my deepest wish for you, Govinda. I will repeat if for you: I hope
you will follow your path to its end, my friend! I hope you will find
liberation!”

At that moment Govinda saw that his friend had left him, and he began to
weep.

“Siddhartha!” he implored.

Siddhartha’s reply was friendly. “Govinda, do not forget that you now
are one of the samanas of the buddha. You have forsaken your home and your
parents, forsaken origins and possessions, by your own free will you have
forsaken friendship. This is what is said in the teachings, this is what
is said by the buddha. This is what you have chosen for yourself.
Tomorrow, Govinda, I will leave you.”

The two friends wandered long among the trees, long they lay but found no
sleep. And Govinda asked his friend over and over again why he would not
take refuge in the teachings of Gotama, what fault could he find in these
teachings. But Siddharth always rejected his insistence and said, “Learn
to be in peace, Govinda. The teachings of the noble one are very good. How
should I find any fault in them?”

As morning was breaking one of the buddha’s followers, one of his eldest
monks, went through the garden and summoned all them who had newly chosen
to take refuge in the teachings. They were to put on their yellow robes
and receive their first instruction in the teachings and duties of their
new status. Govinda ran to Siddhartha, embraced his childhood friend on
more time, and went to join the ranks of the novices.

Siddhartha, however, wandered among the trees, deep in thought.

While he was there he came across Gotama, the noble one. Siddhartha
greeted him with veneration. There was so much peace and goodness to be
seen in the buddha’s eyes that the young man took courage and asked the
venerable one’s permission to speak to him. The noble one gave his
assent with a silent nod.

Siddhartha said, “Noble one, I was yesterday privileged to hear your
wonderful teachings. I had come here from afar with a friend to hear them.
My friend now will stay among your followers and take refuge with you. I,
however, will start my pilgrimage anew.”

“You are free to do as you wish,” said the noble one politely.

“In speaking to you I have been more bold than I should have been,”
Siddhartha continued, “but I would not want to depart from the noble one
without having given him my sincere thoughts. Would the noble one be
willing to give me another moment of his time to hear me?”

The buddha gave his assent with a silent nod.

Siddhartha said, “There is something, most venerable one, that I admired
most of all in what you said. Everything in your teachings is perfectly
clear and supported with proof; you depict the world as a perfect chain,
never broken anywhere on its length, an eternal chain made up of causes
and effects. This has never been made so clear, never set out so
irrefutably; the heart of every brahman must surely beat at a higher level
when he has heard your teachings and first sees the world of perfect
coherence, without omissions, as clear as crystal, not dependent on
chance, not dependent on any gods. This could be good or bad, could bring
joy or sorrow to life, but it is not something we need to consider, it
could well be that it is not of basic importance - but the unity of the
world, that all events are inter-related, the flow of existence that
embraces all things great and small, the law of cause and effect,
existence and death, all these things shine brightly out from your noble
teachings, o perfect one. But there is a place in your own teachings where
this cohesion, this sound argument that governs all things is interrupted,
there is a small hole where something strange, something new, something
not previously there flows into this world, it is something that cannot be
shown, cannot be proved: this is your teaching about not being overcome by
the world, your teaching about liberation. With this tiny hole, with this
tiny intrusion the entire coherent and eternal world-order is once again
broken down and cannot be maintained. I hope you will forgive me for
voicing this objection.”

Gotama had listened to him still and unmoving. Now, with his benevolent
voice, with his clear and polite voice, the perfect one spoke: “You have
listened to the teachings, brahmin’s son, and it is good that you have
thought so deeply about them. You have found a gap in them, a mistake. I
hope you will continue to think about the teachings, you have a thirst for
knowledge, but you should be warned of the thickets of beliefs and of
quibbles around words. Beliefs are not important, they can be beautiful or
ugly, clever or foolish, anyone can stay attached to them or throw them
away. But the teachings that you heard from me are not beliefs and I was
not trying to explain the world to them who have a thirst for knowledge. I
was attempting something quite different, I was attempting to show how to
gain liberation from suffering. This is what Gotama teaches, nothing
else.”

“I hope you will not be cross with me, noble one,” the young man said.
“I have no wish to argue with you but to argue about words, this is why
I have spoken to you in this way. You are certainly quite right, beliefs
alone are not of great importance. But allow me to say one thing more: I
have never for a moment had any doubts about you. I have never for a
moment doubted that you are a buddha, that you have reached the end of
your path, the highest objective that so many thousands of brahmins and
brahmins’ sons pursue. You have found liberation from death. You have
attained this by your own searching, by travelling your own path, by
thought, by meditation, by knowledge, by enlightenment. You have not
attained it by listening to the teachings of others! And - this is what I
have come to believe, noble one - nobody can ever attain liberation by
listening to the teachings of others! Nobody, venerable one, will come to
understand what happened to you in the hour of your enlightenment by
hearing your words and your teachings! The enlightened one, the buddha,
teaches many things about how to live a good and honest life and how to
avoid evil, but the teaching that is so clear, that is so noble, is not
there: the noble one does not give teaching about the secret that he alone
has experienced, he alone out of hundreds of thousands. This is what I
thought, what I perceived, when I heard your teachings. This is the reason
I will continue in my wanderings - not to find other teachings which may
be better, for I know there are none, but to abandon all teachings and all
teachers and either to attain my goal alone or to die. But, noble one, I
will often think back to this day and this hour, for my eyes have seen a
man of great holiness.”

The buddha looked quietly down at the ground, the buddha’s face,
peaceful but inscrutable, shone with perfect serenity.

“I hope your thoughts,” the venerable one said slowly, “are not
mistaken! May you arrive at your objective! But tell me: have you seen how
many samanas I have, how many brothers who have taken refuge in my
teachings? And do you think, samana from a foreign place, do you think all
of these would be better off if they abandoned the teachings and went back
to life in the world with all its enjoyments?”

“Such a thought is far from me,” Siddhartha exclaimed. “I hope they
will all remain with the teachings, I hope they will reach their goal! It
is not up to me to judge how others lead their lives. I can only judge my
own life, I must choose for myself, must reject for myself. We samanas
seek liberation from our selves, noble one. I fear, venerable one, that if
I were one of your followers I might only seem to bring my self to peace,
that my liberation would be illusory and my self wou