Transcriber’s Notes:

    Underscores “_” before and after a word or phrase indicate _italics_
      in the original text.
    Equal signs “=” before and after a word or phrase indicate =bold=
      in the original text.
    Small capitals have been converted to SOLID capitals.
    Antiquated spellings have been preserved.
    Typographical errors have been silently corrected.




=“TOM WATSON”=
          is the one historian through whom we get the point of
          view of the laborer, the mechanic, the plain man, in a
          style that is bold, racy and unconventional. There is
          no other who traces so vividly the life of a _people_
          from the time they were savages until they became the
          most polite and cultured of European nations, as he
          does in

=THE STORY OF FRANCE=

       In two handsome volumes, dark red cloth, gilt tops, price $5.00.

            “It is well called a story, for it reads like a
          fascinating romance.”—_Plaindealer_, Cleveland.

            “A most brilliant, vigorous, human-hearted story
          this: so broad in its sympathies, so vigorous in
          its presentations, so vital, so piquant, lively and
          interesting. It will be read wherever the history of
          France interests men, which is everywhere.”—_New York
          Times’ Sat. Review._

=NAPOLEON=
          =A SKETCH OF HIS LIFE, CHARACTER, STRUGGLES
          AND ACHIEVEMENTS.=

          Illustrated with Portraits and Facsimiles.
            Cloth, 8vo, $2.25 net. (Postage 20c.)

            “The Splendid Study of a Splendid Genius” is the
          caption of a double-column editorial mention of this
          book in _The New York American and Journal_ when it
          first appeared. The comment urged every reader of that
          paper to read the book and continued:

            “There does not live a man who will not be enlarged
          in his thinking processes, there does not live a boy
          who will not be made more ambitious by honest study of
          Watson’s Napoleon * * *

            “If you want the best obtainable, most readable, most
          intelligent, most genuinely American study of this
          great character, read Watson’s history of Napoleon.”

=“TOM WATSON”=
          in these books does far more than make history as
          readable as a novel of the best sort. He tells the
          truth with fire and life, not only of events and
          causes, but of their consequences to and their
          influence on the great mass of people at large. They
          are epoch-making books which every American should
          read and own.

             Orders for the above books will be filled by
 TOM WATSON’S MAGAZINE, 121 West 42nd Street, New York City.




                          TOM WATSON’S MAGAZINE
                 THE MAGAZINE WITH A PURPOSE BACK OF IT
                              =June, 1905=

    _Editorials_                                   _Thomas E. Watson_ 385
       _Our Creed—National Politics and Policies—Is It Paul Jones’s
          Body?—Is the Black Man Superior to the White?—Amending
          the Constitution—“Take the Children”—Paternalism—Planting
          Corn—Not Parson Brownlow’s Son—Mr. President!—Did You
          Know It?—Rural Free Delivery to Country People—Random
          Paragraphs—The Gods We Worship._
    _Poverty_                                  _John H. Girdner, M.D._ 417
    _Tuck-of-Drum_                         _Alfred Tressider Sheppard_ 420
    _The Southern Negro as a Property-Owner_      _Leonora Beck Ellis_ 428
    _A Japanese Populist_                           _Thomas C. Hutten_ 434
    _The King’s Image_                              _Walter E. Grogan_ 437
    _The Story of a Suppressed Populist Newspaper_  _Thos. H. Tibbles_ 446
    _Pole Baker_ (Chapters VII-IX)                    _Will N. Harben_ 451
    _A Phase of the Money Problem Bankers Dare Not
       Discuss_                                       _Albert Griffin_ 463
    _A Leaf from a Protective Tariff Catechism_          _Joel Benton_ 467
    _Monopoly, The Power Behind The Trust_        _Joseph Dana Miller_ 472
    _The Heritage of Maxwell Fair_ (Conclusion)       _Vincent Harper_ 479
    _Educational Department_                        _Thomas E. Watson_ 497
    _The Track Walker_                              _Theodore Dreiser_ 502
    _The House of Cards_                                 _Ruth Sterry_ 503
    _The Say of Other Editors_                                         504
    _News Record_                                                      508

         Application made for entry as Second-Class Matter at
               New York (N. Y.) Post Office, March, 1905
             Copyright, 1905, in U. S. and Great Britain.
             Published by TOM WATSON’S MAGAZINE,
                      121 West 42d Street, N. Y.

             TERMS: $1.00 A YEAR;       10 CENTS A NUMBER




                    TOM WATSON’S MAGAZINE ADVERTISER


                       How to Overthrow Plutocracy

Several million people in the United States are in substantial accord
with the demands of the People’s Party. A majority of all voters would
welcome Government Ownership of Railroads and other public utilities. The
recent great victory in Chicago for Municipal Ownership demonstrates this
fact. What Chicago has done locally can be accomplished in the nation—and
WILL be done as soon as the people overcome

                            Political Inertia

With many the voting habit becomes fixed after one or two elections. The
ordinary man keeps on “voting ’er straight” long after he has discovered
that his party’s actions are out of joint with his own views. Party
“regularity” commands the average man’s support long after he KNOWS his
party is headed wrong. Some really great men, even, have placed party
“regularity” before principle.

                              A Great Light

on the correct principle of organization is to be found in that admirable
work by George Gordon Hastings,

                         The First American King

A dashing romance, in which a scientist and a detective of today wake up
seventy-five years later to find His Majesty, Imperial and Royal, William
I, Emperor of the United States and King of the Empire State of New York,
ruling the land, with the real power in the hands of half a dozen huge
trusts. Automobiles have been replaced by phaërmobiles; air-ships sail
above the surface of the earth; there has been a successful war against
Russia; a social revolution is brewing. The book is both an enthralling
romance and a serious sociological study, which scourges unmercifully the
society and politics of the present time, many of whose brightest stars
reappear in the future under thinly disguised names. There are wit and
humor and sarcasm galore—a stirring tale of adventure and a charming love
story.

                       Hon. Thomas E. Watson says:

“I read ‘The First American King,’ and found it one of the most
interesting books I ever opened. Mr. Hastings has not only presented a
profound study of our social and economic conditions, but he has made the
story one of fascination. It reminds me at times of Bellamy’s ‘Looking
Backward,’ but the story is told with so much more human interest, the
situations themselves are so much more dramatic, that it impresses me
very much more favorably than any book of that kind I have ever known.”

Interesting as the story is as a romance and as a critical sociological
study, one of its vitally important points is

                             How to Organize

    =Mr. Hastings says:=

“It has been suggested,” continued General Mainwarren, “that a wise
course for patriotic leaders of your day would have been to have
abandoned the hope of converting and securing the grown voters as
a body. It would have been best for them, at a given time, to have
said: ‘Beginning from today, we will pay no attention to any male who
is more than fifteen years of age and who is now, or within the next
six years will be, entitled to a vote. But we will direct all efforts
to an entirely new body of suffragists.’ They should then have turned
their attention to the _women of the land_, to the mothers of future
generations of voters. It has been said that ‘Every woman is at heart a
royalist.’ It could with equal truth be said: ‘Every woman is by nature
a politician.’ ... Look at the influence exerted politically by various
women of whom history speaks.”

                     This Is the Key-Note of Success

For fifteen years the People’s Party, in season and out of season, has
preached “Equal Rights to All, Special Privileges to None.” It has
persistently demanded that government shall attend to public matters,
and that private business shall be conducted by individuals with the
least possible interference—and absolutely no favoritism—by government.
It has continually demanded public ownership and government operation
of railroads and other public utilities. It has urged the initiative,
referendum and the recall; a scientific money system; the abolition
of monopoly in every form. Millions of voters—as the Chicago election
clearly indicates—are in accord with the People’s Party; but heretofore
the voting habit, the “vote ’er straight” political insanity, has kept
them in political slavery.

                            Educate the Boys

Let us train up a new generation of voters—without diminishing our
efforts to break up old party habits—who will have the courage of
conviction and correct ideas regarding politics and economics. Let us
interest the mothers, so we can have the boys taught to cast their first
votes on the side of Justice. Habit will then keep them voting right.

                            Let Us Begin Now

Mr. Hastings’s book is a thought-provoker. It combines romance with
sociology and teaches while entertaining. With “The First American King”
and TOM WATSON’S MAGAZINE in another 100,000 homes, our first great step
will be taken toward overcoming plutocracy. With this end in view, we
have made arrangements whereby we can offer a dollar book, 350 pages, and
a dollar magazine one year, 128 pages monthly, both for only $1.50.

      Tom Watson’s Magazine and The First American King      $1.50

In order to treat all alike, the book will be sent postpaid to any
present subscriber of TOM WATSON’S MAGAZINE on receipt of 60 cents. No
person not a subscriber can buy “The First American King” of us for
a cent less than $1.00. If you have not already subscribed for the
magazine, send us $1.50 today for this attractive combination, and
expedite the work of building up the People’s Party of the future.

Address all orders to

          TOM WATSON’S MAGAZINE, 121 West 42d Street, New York

       *       *       *       *       *

                       _SOME POPULIST PRINCIPLES_

(1) Public Ownership of Public Utilities, including Railroads,
Telegraphs, Telephones, etc.

(2) Direct Legislation by the people: the Initiative, Referendum and
Recall.

(3) The election of all officers by the people.

(4) Graduated Income Tax and Inheritance Tax.

(5) National Currency created by the Government without the intervention
of National Banks; every dollar to be the equal of every other dollar.

(6) Postal Savings Banks; the eight-hour day, regulation of Child Labor
in Factories, Sweat-shops and similar avocations.

(7) Opposition to land monopoly.

(8) Removal of Tariff burdens from the necessaries of life which the poor
must have to live.

=Populism= seeks to put political power into the hands of the people and
to work out a system of =Equal and Exact Justice to all, without special
favors to any=.




                        =_TOM WATSON’S MAGAZINE_=

               VOL. I          JUNE, 1905          No. 4




                              _Editorials_

                           BY THOMAS E. WATSON


                               _Our Creed_

The People’s Party does not attempt the impossible, or seek the
unattainable.

Our young men do not dream dreams; our old men do not see visions. We
are wedded to practical reforms which have been tried in civilized
communities, and which have vindicated themselves by results.

We do not propose to re-create society, subvert law and order, confiscate
property, or substitute a new system of government for the old.

We do not want to tear down the house in order to repair it.

We do not hope to build a perfect state with imperfect human hands, but
we do intend to make the government as nearly perfect as possible, to the
end that it shall represent that conception of justice which deals with
all men alike, and allows to every child of Adam a fair chance in the
world which God created as a home for the human race.

       *       *       *       *       *

We believe that the government should be clothed with all the attributes
of sovereignty; that _the government should govern_, and should _not
delegate to private citizens or corporations_ any part of its sovereign
power.

The creation of a national currency has always been an attribute of
sovereignty—of royalty.

In a system where the people rule the people succeed to the power of the
king; and that attribute of sovereignty which the king exercised and
did not delegate should be exercised by the people and should not be
delegated.

Therefore, the Populists, successors to the old Greenbackers, have always
clung to it as an article of faith that the Federal Government should
exercise its constitutional right to create a currency, and should
not delegate that power to national banks or to private citizens or
corporations.

The government should supply the country with a sufficient amount of
national money, every dollar of which should be equal to any other; every
dollar of which should be a full legal tender for all claims, public and
private, and _no dollar of which should be made redeemable in any other
dollar_.

       *       *       *       *       *

We believe that those things which are essentially public in their nature
and their use should belong to the public, and should be equally enjoyed
by all.

Just as the navigable rivers are public to the beggar and the millionaire
alike, just as the Bay and the Gulf and the Harbor and the navigable
Lakes are the common property of the rich and the poor, the high and low,
the black and white, so we believe that the roads should be common ground
upon which every citizen should be free to pass upon terms of equality,
and that the iron highways of today, which were taken from the people
by the exercise of the right of Eminent Domain, should be restored to
the public by the same law of Eminent Domain, a fair compensation having
been paid, and the property operated hereafter for the benefit of all the
people.

So with the Telegraph and the Telephone and Express Companies.

In every city and town we believe that the municipality, which is a
part of the state’s sovereignty, should take over to itself those
public utilities which in their very nature are monopolies, and, just
compensation having been paid, that these utilities should be used for
the benefit of the people, to whom they belong.

       *       *       *       *       *

We believe that the government should be supported by a system of
taxation in which each citizen will pay taxes _in proportion to his
ability to pay_.

We believe in a Tax on the Franchises enjoyed by private corporations.

We believe that the Income Tax would be the fairest of all taxes, because
it would take for the support of the government, not the property of
the citizen, but a portion of the income which the citizen derives from
that property, or from his individual exertions, and the tax would be
proportioned to the income.

That property or that salary could not be enjoyed without the protection
and the advantages which flow from government, and it is eminently
fair, where the government has protected me, or where it affords me
such opportunities, that I can receive a large income from any source
whatever, I should pay to the government, in return for its protection
and its advantages, a fair share of that which I could not have made
without that protection and those advantages.

Under our present system a man like John D. Rockefeller pays no more
Tariff tax when he buys a hat than a doctor or lawyer or preacher pays
when he buys a hat. So with the shoes, the clothes, the crockery on the
table, the furniture in the house. Many a citizen whose income does not
amount to ten thousand dollars per year pays fully as much Tariff tax in
the purchasing of necessary articles of clothing, furniture and food as
John D. Rockefeller pays, whose income is counted monthly by the millions
of dollars.

The same thing is true of Carnegie, Morgan, Hill, Harriman, Gould,
Cassatt, Vanderbilt. Many a farmer whose income from his farm may not do
more than give his family an actual support, after the operating expenses
are paid, contributes annually a greater sum in Tariff tax to the Federal
Government than is paid by the fabulously wealthy beneficiaries of class
legislation.

       *       *       *       *       *

It has been said that the People’s Party dodges the Tariff issue. This is
not true.

One of our earliest platforms, which has been repeatedly reindorsed,
declares:

“_We demand the removal of the Tariff tax from the necessaries of life
which the poor must have to live._”

This is precisely the principle announced by Thomas Jefferson, who
declared that the taxes should be so laid that the luxuries of life would
bear the burden of government, and that his ideal was a system in which
the poor would be entirely relieved from the crushing weight of taxation.

Furthermore, we have said that legislation should not be so framed as to
build up one business at the expense of another.

If the People’s Party platform were enacted into law, _there could be no
such thing as a Trust in the United States_.

In order that the people should become the victims of such tyranny as
that exercised by the Trusts two things are necessary: _Foreign relief
must be made impossible, and domestic relief made impracticable_.

The Tariff wall keeps the foreigner from interfering; the railroads and
the national banks supporting the Trusts make it impossible for domestic
dissatisfaction to assert itself effectively.

_If the people should put upon the free list those articles which are
made the subject of the Trusts, the foreigner could at once invade the
market, and destroy the monopoly upon which the Trust is based._

If the Populist principles of finance and of transportation should be
carried into effect, the Government abolishing national banks and private
ownership of transportation lines, _the rebate would be impossible,
discriminations would cease, equality would prevail, and there would be
no collusion between the national banks and the railroads by which Trusts
are made invincible as they are now invincible_.

       *       *       *       *       *

We believe in direct Legislation—putting the power of making laws and
choosing rulers back into the hands of those to whom it belongs—and the
election of all officers by the people.

The people should not be made to await the pleasure of the Legislature
or of Congress. They should not be kept in ignorance of what the law is
until legislative acts become known through the newspapers. There should
be in every case the right to initiate those laws which they want, and to
veto, through the Referendum, any law which they do not like.

When an officer whom they have elected shows by any vote or act that he
is not the man they took him to be, they should not have to wait till the
expiration of his term to get a better man. They should have the right to
recall the officer the moment he betrays his trust.

       *       *       *       *       *

We believe in the eight-hour day for labor in Government works, in
factories, workshops and mines.

We believe in the regulation of child labor in factories, workshops and
mines, to the end that children of tender age shall not be made to slave
out their lives in order that corporations shall have cheap labor and
large dividends.

Saturn, the old fable tells us, devoured his own children: Christian
civilization does the same thing.

As long as we permit children of ten and twelve years to labor from eight
to fourteen hours per day in our mills and workshops modern civilization
is another Saturn. _We are devouring our own children._

       *       *       *       *       *

We believe that the land, the common heritage of all the people, should
not be monopolized for speculative purposes, or by alien ownership, but
that legislation should be so shaped as to encourage to its full extent
the right of every man born into this world to till the soil and make a
living out of it.

And one of the principal reasons why we favor a graduated income tax,
which increases by geometrical progression as the income increases, is
that it automatically keeps the wealth of the country in a constant sort
of redistribution, and acts as a check upon that excessive accumulation
which is recognized by all intelligent thinkers as one of the most
serious perils and intolerable evils of our present era of class
legislation.

These are the most important articles of our faith. It is for these
principles that we have struggled ever since 1891—with never a doubt that
they were sound, that they would constantly gain converts, _that they
would ultimately win_.

When I founded the _People’s Party Paper_ in Atlanta, Ga., in 1891 (which
paper lived and toiled for these principles until the fusion movement of
1896 killed it, as it killed twelve hundred other Populist papers), I
announced the same purpose which I announced in the prospectus of this
magazine.

My faith was as firm in 1891 as it is today, and I had as little doubt
then as I have now that Populism is just as sure to triumph as the sun is
to continue to warm the world.

The reforms will be effected _because the country needs them_. It cannot
stand much more of the present system. It will not accept Socialism.
Occupying the middle ground of radical, but practical reform, Populism is
inevitable.


                    _National Politics and Policies_

There is a saying that the difference between a wise man and a fool is
that the wise man never makes the same mistake twice, while the fool
continues to make it without limit.

It is of supreme importance that those who will act as political leaders
during the next four years should think clearly in order that they may
act wisely.

We have not, as yet, discovered any brighter lamp with which to guide our
footsteps than that which Patrick Henry named the Lamp of Experience.

If I felt that our national leaders were about to repeat a disastrous
mistake and adopt a policy which seems the continuance of the reign of
class legislation and special privilege, I should be false to my own
sense of duty if I did not at this early day point out that error and
warn the Jeffersonians against it.

I say Jeffersonians because, after all is said and done, there are but
two great differences of political thought in the United States—never
have been but two; never will be but two.

On the one hand are those who believe that legislation should be dictated
by the interest of the few; that the powers and the benefits of good
government should be monopolized by the few; that the blessings and the
opportunities of life should be the heritage of the few; that wealth and
privilege and national initiative should perpetually be the legacy of the
few.

On the other hand is the Jeffersonian idea that the human family are all
alike the children of God; that the earth and all it contains was created
for the benefit of this human family, and that any system of law and
government which gathers into the hands of the few an unjust proportion
of the common estate, to the exclusion of the vast majority, is an
infamous invasion of the natural rights of man.

Now, what is it that endangers the cause of the Jeffersonians?

What is it that seems to me to be so certain to insure the continuance of
the rule of the few over the many?

It is the continued existence of the political alignment of the great
mass of the people in two political parties, each of which, in its heart
of hearts, is wedded to the rule of the few.

Neither one of these parties wants any material change in our present
system of legislation or of administration.

Both of them are absolutely dominated by the same interests.

In the ranks of each of these parties are found the powerful railroad
kings, the irresistible trusts, the indispensable national banks, the
vastly influential insurance companies.

As a matter of fact, nearly every board of management of every predatory
corporation against which the people are rising in revolt is made up half
and half of Democrats and Republicans, in order that, no matter which
party wins at the polls, the corporation will have influence at court.

It is so clear to me that the only possible hope for the people is to
drive these two parties together while the people unite under another
standard.

In vain does Judge Parker talk about the difference between his Democracy
and the Republicanism of Mr. Roosevelt. During the campaign he was unable
to state any difference, and there is, in fact, no difference.

Between Belmont’s ideas of government and those of Mark Hanna there is
not the slightest difference.

Between the Democratic corporation and the Republican corporation it is
absurd to claim that there is any difference.

Between Democratic manufacturers and Republican manufacturers no human
being of intelligence will expect any difference or find any.

In other words, the millionaire beneficiaries of class legislation
control both of the old parties, and the battle which they wage year
after year, decade after decade, is a mere sham battle. The strategy of
the corporations consists in keeping the people divided in order that the
corporations may rule.

Believing this to be true, I am painfully impressed with the fact that
Mr. Bryan is making a huge mistake.

The pity of it is, he has already made that mistake twice, and is now
making it for the third time.

What is the mistake?

It consists of the effort to get radical reform out of a party which has
always been dominated and always will be dominated by conservatives. When
the currency was contracted just after the Civil War and ruin brought
upon so many thousands of people in this country, it took the joint
action of both the old parties to do it.

When the revenue taxes were taken off railroads, manufactures, insurance
companies, bank checks and express companies, soon after the close of the
Civil War, it took the joint action of both the old parties to do it.

When the Income Tax was lifted from the burdened shoulders of the rich,
it took the joint action of both the old parties to do it.

When Silver was struck down and the Gold Standard forced upon us, it took
the joint action of both the old parties to do it.

When our National Bank System was enthroned, and that terribly unjust
system was chartered to prey upon the people, it required the joint
action of both the old parties to do it.

When Congress, over the protest of Thaddeus Stevens and others, obeyed
the command of the Rothschilds (delivered at Washington personally by
August Belmont, the father of the present Boss of the Democratic Party),
and declared by legislative enactment that the banks should be paid in
gold while the soldier at the front should be paid in greenbacks, it
required the joint action of both the old parties to do it.

There has never been a necessary act of Congress—necessary to the rule
of the few, necessary to carry out the Hamiltonian ideal—that did not
rest for support one foot on the Republican Party and the other on the
Democratic Party.

The man who does not know this to be true is unfamiliar with official
records.

The time has been when Mr. Bryan held the same opinions which I am
expressing now. The time has been when he declared, in speech and
writing, that there was no hope for reform in the Democratic Party.

In 1896 Mr. Bryan, in the Omaha _World-Herald_, editorially asked:

“_Can a National Convention harmonize the discordant elements of the
Democratic Party? Impossible._

“Suppose the advocates of bimetallism control the National Convention
and nominate a Free Silver Democrat upon a free coinage platform, will
Cleveland, Carlisle, Olney, Morton, _et al._ support the ticket? Of
course not. They say that the free coinage of silver means individual
dishonesty, commercial disaster and national dishonor, and if they
believe what they say they ought not to support the ticket, because
their duty to their country is higher than their duty to their party
organization. If, on the other hand, the convention nominates a Gold
Standard Democrat on a platform indorsing the gold standard, gold bonds
and national bank currency, should the nominee be supported by those who
believe the gold standard to be a conspiracy of the capitalistic classes
against the producers of wealth—a crime against mankind? Who says they
should?

“If to continue Mr. Cleveland’s financial policy is to declare war
against the common people, what friend of the common people would be
willing to enlist in such a warfare, even at the command of his party?

“The Democratic Party cannot serve God and Mammon; it cannot serve
plutocracy and at the same time defend the rights of the masses.

“If it yields to the plutocracy it ought to lose, and it will lose, the
support of the masses; if it espouses the cause of the people, it cannot
expect either votes or contributions from the capitalistic classes and
from the great corporations.”

In pursuance of this very correct line of reasoning, Mr. Bryan resolutely
declared that if the Democratic Party adopted the gold standard, “_I
promise you that I will go out and serve my country and my God under some
other name, even if I must go alone._”

Again Mr. Bryan said, in his book called “The First Battle,” Chapter III,
page 124, “In that speech I took the position which I have announced
since on several occasions, namely, that I would not support for the
Presidency an advocate of the gold standard.”

Again Mr. Bryan said: “Does the individual member of a party at all times
reserve the right to vote against the nominee of a party, and to abandon
his party entirely whenever in his judgment his duty to his country
requires it? He may abandon the party temporarily, as, for instance,
when an unfit candidate is nominated, or the voter may abandon his party
permanently, either when he himself changes his opinion upon a paramount
public question or when his party changes its position.”

Now let the reader compare the present attitude of Mr. Bryan with the
political ethics expounded by him in his book.

He was then the idol of the radicals; he was then the Tribune of the
People.

He was the strong and stalwart foe of every plutocrat, every Wall Street
interest, every beneficiary of class legislation.

The people hailed him with an enthusiasm which had not been known since
the days of Henry Clay. So great was their faith in him that he swept
into his movement in 1896 the Free Silver organization and the great bulk
of the Populist Party.

Who is it that cannot see how loftily he held his flag in those days? Who
is it that does not realize how sadly it droops today?

From the noble stand of 1893 and 1896, what a falling off is there!
Boldly he declared that he would never support for the Presidency an
advocate of the gold standard. Yet, when Judge Parker slapped his face
in public with the Gold Telegram of 1904, the dauntless Bryan turned the
other cheek, like a very meek Christian indeed.

He had said that a Democrat might bolt his party _temporarily_ upon the
nomination of an unfit candidate; he had said that Judge Parker was an
unfit candidate, but he did not bolt the nomination, even _temporarily_.

He had said that the voter might abandon his party _permanently_ when
that party changed its position upon a paramount public question; yet
when the Democratic Party, with extraordinary suddenness, changed its
position upon more than one paramount question in 1904, Mr. Bryan did not
bolt his party _permanently_.

He had said that if the Democrats took up the Republican financial
policy, which meant the slavery of the debtors of this country and the
impoverishment of the people, he would go out and serve his country and
his God under some other name, even if he had to go alone. Yet when his
party did come over to the Republican financial policy, and came by
telegraph at that, _Mr. Bryan did not go out to serve either his country
or his God under some other name_.

He had said to his brother Democrats: “If you are ready to go down
on your knees and apologize for what you have said” (abuse of the
Republicans and the gold standard), “you will go without me.”

Yet when the Democratic Party, at the St. Louis Convention in 1904, went
down on its knees, in effect, to apologize for the abuse which they had
heaped upon the Republicans for eight years, they did not go without Mr.
Bryan. The knees of Mr. Bryan hit the floor in timely cadence with the
knees of all the others, and when he filed out of the convention hall the
dust was there to show it just as it was there to show it on the knees of
all the others.

Bryan himself asked the question in 1896: “Can a National Convention
harmonize the discordant elements of the Democratic Party?” He answered
his own question in the comprehensive word, “_Impossible_.”

The event of the campaign of 1896 showed that he was right, for the
Cleveland-Carlisle-Belmont element knifed him.

In the campaign of 1900 they knifed him again. In the campaign of 1904,
when the convention nominated a gold standard Democrat on a platform
indorsing the gold standard, gold bonds and the gold bank currency,
the people refused to support the sell-out of the National Democratic
Party to Wall Street, just as Mr. Bryan, in 1896, prophesied that they
would, in spite of the fact that the prophet of 1896 had become the gold
standard nominee’s most earnest advocate in the campaign of 1904.

In other words, the people had become so inoculated with the true gospel
of Bryan, the Tribune of 1893 and 1896, that they refused to follow the
change of heart and the change of conduct which came over Bryan, the
Parkerite of 1904.

Will not Mr. Bryan reflect upon this and draw a lesson from it? He
himself has declared that he is attempting the impossible in trying to
harmonize the discordant elements of the Democratic Party.

What is the real statesmanship demanded at this time?

That those who believe in Jeffersonian ideals, whether they are now
in the Republican, Democratic, Populist or Socialist parties, should
come together without prejudice for party names, and should unite in
the common cause of driving from power the beneficiaries of class
legislation, no matter whether those beneficiaries are called Democrats
or Republicans.

Let the Belmonts and Morgans get together in the same party so that we
can fight them both at the same time.

As long as we cling to party differences and party names our efforts will
come to naught, as they did in 1896, 1900 and 1904.

Mr. Bryan wants the reform movement to stop and wait for him, while for
four years he struggles to get the better of the plutocratic element of
his own party. If they were able to wrest control from him when he had so
much more advantage than he has now, how can we expect him to take that
control from their strong hands?

But, suppose he does succeed in defeating the Belmont-Cleveland element
in the convention of 1908, does he not know that they will fulfil his
prediction again and knife him as they have done twice already?

On the other hand, suppose they conquer him in 1908 as they did in 1904,
will he not submit tamely to kiss the hand that smote him as he did in
the last convention? Most assuredly he will.

He lost his opportunity to fly the flag of revolt when he failed to
resent the Gold Telegram of 1904. That opportunity passed, never to
return.

Absolutely the only hope of radical reform lies in a straight-out,
aggressive and fearless _fight upon both the old parties_, which in turn
have had control of the Government, and which have played into each
other’s hands in forging the chains of class legislation which now bind
and burden the Common People.


                       _Is It Paul Jones’s Body?_

Have they found the body of John Paul Jones?

The experts say that they have.

To the legal mind, the fact that _experts_ had to be called in to pass
upon the question of identity is sufficient to arouse suspicion and
provoke investigation.

As stated in a former number, I was certain they would find Paul Jones—in
their minds—for that was what they were looking for.

Whenever, for instance, the medical expert starts out to find arsenic in
the human stomach, arsenic generally shows up all right enough.

In like manner French experts were called in to identify a certain corpse
as that of Paul Jones, and, after the most elaborate and beautifully
regular formalities, they solemnly pronounced the verdict which they knew
was expected and which they were predisposed to find.

“This is Paul Jones, isn’t it?” asks General Porter, most suavely, not to
say persuasively.

How could the politest experts of the politest people on earth say nay?

The case was pitiful.

The search for Paul Jones’s body had reached a crisis. Only four leaden
coffins had been found in the old graveyard, and one of these _had_ to be
Paul Jones, because he had been buried in such a coffin, and the other
three bore name-plates which showed they could not be his.

The fourth bore no name-plate; therefore it _must_ be Jones’s coffin.

The necessity of the situation required it.

Consequently, polite French experts measure, compare, incubate, decide
and bring in the verdict desired.

Looking at the matter as a lawyer, I should say that there is not
sufficient legal evidence offered, as yet, to establish the identity of
the dead body.

The cemetery in which Commodore Paul Jones was buried was closed by law
in 1793.

_A canal was afterward cut through it._

The great sea-fighter was buried, as Napoleon was, in uniform.

In the Life of him—“Great Commanders’ Series”—by Cyrus Townsend Brady,
the statement is made that _Paul Jones was buried in the American
uniform_, and that _a sword and other articles were placed in the coffin_.

The body which General Porter has found was _not_ clad in uniform.

There was no sword, or other article, found in the coffin.

Commodore Jones died of dropsy, which had swollen his body to such an
extent that he could not button his waistcoat.

Yet the French experts declare that all the measurements tally exactly
with those of the living Jones.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Should They Do So?_

Awful changes take place after death, and they are greater with some than
with others.

Should the measurements of a corpse which had been entombed more than
a hundred years correspond _exactly_ with those of the same body when
alive?

Most biographers put the _height_ of Admiral Jones at “about five feet
and eight inches.”

Won’t you find a greater number of men—in France especially—whose height
is “about five feet eight inches” than you’ll find at any other figure?

And will you not find more _corpses_ of about that length?

Yet in these measurements consists the whole of the testimony which has
been offered to the American people to convince them that the body of
Paul Jones is at last to come home.

Unless the matter of the uniform and the sword be cleared up, it is
impossible to accept the conclusion arrived at by the experts.

This corpse may be, as already stated, a good enough Jones for that
$35,000, but it has not yet been shown to be John Paul Jones, the naval
hero of our War of Independence.


                _Is the Black Man Superior to the White?_

With statistics one can prove many things—the conclusion arrived at
depending, in all cases, considerably upon the man behind the figures.

This time the man behind the figures is Doctor Booker Washington—may his
shadow never grow less!

In the course of a recent lecture, the learned Doctor laid down the
proposition that the black man is superior to the white, and he proved
it—proved it by statistics.

He said that there is 85 per cent. of illiteracy among the Spaniards,
while there is only 54 per cent. of illiteracy among the negroes;
therefore the negroes are clearly more advanced in civilization than the
Spaniards.

Poor old Spain!

The learned Doctor further demonstrated that there is 65 per cent. of
illiteracy among the Italians; therefore the negroes are far ahead
of Italy. Russian illiteracy being 70 per cent. the black man takes
precedence of the land of Peter the Great, Skobelef, Gorky, Turgenef and
Tolstoy. South America, having an illiteracy of 80 per cent., falls far
to the rear of the negro—and Castro must add this additional kick to the
many he has already received from North America.

Proud of his statistics, Doctor Booker Washington exclaims: “_The negro
race has developed more rapidly in the thirty years of its freedom than
the Latin race has in one thousand years of freedom._”

That’s a bold statement, Doctor.

To say nothing of its accuracy, may it not have been an unwise thing
for you to claim that the black man has risen during thirty years more
rapidly in the scale of civilization than the whites have risen in a
thousand?

True, you confine yourself to the Italians, the Spaniards, the Russians
and the South Americans, but when you say the darkest of all the colored
races is superior to that great section of the white race named by you,
does it not occur to you that you may create a feeling of resentment
among _all_ the whites?

You have thousands of true friends throughout the entire country—white
men who have most generously helped you in your work, helped you
with money, with moral support and with a certain amount of social
recognition. Your admirers refer to you as a great man. They allude to
your work as a great work. The South helps you with appropriations, just
as the North helps you with donations. We want to see you succeed in
building up your race.

But have you a single white friend who will indorse your statement
that the black race is so superior to the whites that it can do in one
generation what it required the whites a thousand years to do?

Do you imagine that your friends, President Roosevelt, Mr. Carnegie, Dr.
Hart, Bishop Potter, and others, will like you better when they hear you
putting forth a claim to race superiority? Doctor, you have overshot the
mark.

_Whenever the North wakes up to the fact that you are teaching the blacks
that they are superior to the whites, you are going to feel the east
wind._

What do you mean by racial development, Doctor?

Apparently your standard of measurement is illiteracy. That is to say, if
a greater number of negroes than of Spaniards can read, then the negro
has achieved a higher plane in civilization.

Is that your idea? Does the ability to read constitute race development?

According to that, a million negro children attend school twelve months
and become “civilized” because they have learned to spell “Baker” and to
read “Mary had a little lamb.”

Does it not strike you, Doctor, that such a measure might be delusive?

In making up your tables of illiteracy, why didn’t you include _all the
negroes_, as you included _all_ the Italians, _all_ the Spaniards, _all_
the Russians?

Why leave out your home folks in Africa, Doctor?

Why omit Santo Domingo and Haiti?

If you will number _all_ the negroes, Doctor, your percentage of
illiteracy _among the blacks_ may run up among the nineties, and knock
your calculation into a cocked hat.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the West Indies God poured His blessings with lavish hand upon the
island of Haiti. The French went there and built up a civilization. The
Revolution of 1789 freed the negroes who were held in slavery by the
whites, and civil war soon followed.

The blacks outnumbered the whites and the climate was their ally. Yellow
fever did for them what frost did for the Russians when Napoleon struck
at their liberties. They achieved freedom, and they have had it, not for
thirty years, but for a hundred years.

_What have your people done with their freedom in Santo Domingo,
Doctor?_ Back, back into barbarism, voodooism, human sacrifice, social
and political anarchy they have plunged; and their history is one long
blood-stained record of backsliding from the standard which the French
had already established. Even now your black brethren in Santo Domingo
are beseeching the white man of the United States to do that which they
are unable to do—administer national affairs. In self-defense this
Government may have to treat Santo Domingo as Great Britain treats
Jamaica, both governments acting upon the demonstrated fact that the
blacks, _left to themselves_, are incapable of self-government and race
development.

       *       *       *       *       *

But before entering into a comparison of racial progress, Doctor, it
is in order to note the fact that you accredit the negro with only
thirty years of freedom. Why, Doctor, _the negro race, as a race, has
enjoyed just as long a period of freedom as the Celts, the Latins, the
Anglo-Saxons and the Slavs_.

The black race in Africa was as free as the Indian race in North America.

During the thousand years in which the whites were painfully creating
the civilization which _you_ now enjoy, _your_ race, in its native home,
was doing pretty much the same things which the red race was doing in
North America. Your people were running about in the woods, naked, eating
raw meat, eternally at war—tribe with tribe—steeped in ignorance, vice
and superstition, with an occasional lapse into human sacrifice and
cannibalism.

_Your race, as a race, is free now in Africa, as it has been since the
dawn of history:—where is the civilization which it worked out for
itself?_ It does not exist; it never did exist.

The negro has been absolutely unable to develop as a race when left to
himself. Nowhere, at any time, has he developed a system of agriculture,
or commerce, or manufactures, made headway in mining or engineering, or
conceived a system of finance. Never has he produced a system of laws,
institutions of state, religious organization, or worked out a political
ideal. Never has he created a literature, or developed original capacity
for the fine arts. His foot has never even crossed the threshold of the
world of creative painting, sculpture, music, architecture Into the
realms of science, in the domain of original thought, in the higher
reaches of mental power where the human mind grapples with vast problems,
material and spiritual, the problems of time and eternity, the negro has
never entered. No word has ever fallen from his lips that was not the
echo of what some white man had already said. He has sometimes _put his
foot in the white man’s track_, but that is the best he has ever done.

       *       *       *       *       *

Compare this imitative race with the great Latin stock—a stock from
which sprang Rienzi and Garibaldi, Cavour and Napoleon, Da Vinci and
Galileo, Savonarola and Leo the Tenth, Titian and Bellini, Raphael and
Michelangelo.

The Latin race, whether in Spain, Italy or South America, has developed
systems of agriculture, finance, commerce, manufactures, education,
religion, government—has created literature, laws and institutions of
state, has evidenced capacity in science and art.

       *       *       *       *       *

The negroes superior to the Latins?

Heavens above!

During the thousand years which Doctor Washington says that the Latins
have done less than the negroes have done in thirty, Spain rose into
world-power, dominated the European Continent, shook England’s throne to
its base, broke the Turkish scimiter in the great sea-fight of Lepanto,
evolved a splendid literature, reached the highest development in the
Fine Arts, launched Columbus upon his voyage into unknown seas to test
the suggestion of another Latin—Toscanelli—and thus took the first daring
step in that marvelous chapter of Discovery whose sober facts are grander
and stranger than Romance.

Has the learned Doctor ever studied the history of Mexico—the Latin
country south of us?

Since a foreign yoke was thrown off and Mexico “found herself,” what
country has made nobler progress?

The negro in Santo Domingo has had a hundred years of freedom; Mexico
scarce half so many; _yet compare the Mexico of today with the Santo
Domingo of today._ Left to themselves, the Latins of Mexico have built up
a magnificent civilization.

Left to themselves, the negroes of Santo Domingo have destroyed what the
French had already built.

_In Mexico conditions get better, year after year._

_In Santo Domingo conditions grow worse, year after year._

If the learned Doctor wants to make a study in contrasts, let him first
read “Where Black Rules White,” by Hesketh Prichard, and then read “The
Awakening of a Nation,” by Charles F. Lummis, and I venture to say that
some of his cocky self-complacency as to the superiority of the negroes
over the whites will ooze out of him.

       *       *       *       *       *

As to Italy—can it be that Italy has done less in a thousand years than
the negroes have done in thirty?

The greatest man that ever lived was of Italian extraction. Taine says
that Napoleon was a true Italian in character and intellect. If that
be true, then _the two greatest men the world ever saw_ were Latins.
Wherever the civilized man lives today his environment, his thoughts, his
ide