No. 1252.      25 Cents.

  [Illustration: Lovell's
  Library.

  A TRI-WEEKLY
  PUBLICATION OF THE BEST
  CURRENT & STANDARD
  LITERATURE]

  Annual Subscription, $30. Entered at the Post Office, New York, as second
  class matter, Oct. 16, 1838.

  COUNTESS
  VERA

  BY
  MRS. ALEX. McVEIGH MILLER,

  AUTHOR OF "A DREADFUL TEMPTATION," "QUEENIE'S TERRIBLE
  SECRET," ETC., ETC.

  _NEW YORK
  JOHN W. LOVELL COMPANY
  14 & 16 VESEY STREET_




[Illustration: PEARLINE.]


Is better than any soap; handier, finer, more effective, more of it,
more for the money, and in the form of a powder, for your convenience.
Takes, as it were, the fabric in one hand, the dirt in the other, and
lays them apart--comparatively speaking, washing with little work.

As it saves the worst of the work, so it saves the worst of the wear.
It isn't the use of clothes that makes them old before their time; it
is rubbing and straining, getting the dirt out by main strength.

For scrubbing, house-cleaning, washing dishes, windows and glassware,
Pearline has no equal.

Beware of imitations, prize packages and peddlers.

  JAMES PYLE, New York.




LYDIA E. PINKHAM'S

VEGETABLE COMPOUND

IS A POSITIVE CURE

_For all those painful Complaints and Weaknesses so common to our best
female population._

[Illustration]

It will cure entirely the worst form of Female Complaints, all Ovarian
troubles, Inflammation, Ulceration, Falling and Displacements of the
Womb and the consequent Spinal Weakness, and is particularly adapted to
the Change of Life.

It will dissolve and expel Tumors from the uterus in an early stage
of development. The tendency to cancerous humors there is checked
very speedily by its use. It removes faintness, flatulency, destroys
all craving for stimulants, and relieves weakness of the stomach. It
cures Bloating, Headaches, Nervous Prostration, General Debility,
Sleeplessness, Depression, and Indigestion.

That feeling of bearing down, causing pain, weight and backache, is
always permanently cured by its use.

It will at all times and under all circumstances act in harmony
with the laws that govern the female system. For the cure of Kidney
Complaints of either sex, this Compound is unsurpassed.

Lydia E. Pinkham's Vegetable Compound is prepared at Lynn, Mass. Price,
$1.00. Six bottles for $5.00. Sent by mail in the form of Pills, also
in the form of Lozenges, on receipt of price, $1.00 per box, for
either. Send for pamphlet. All letters of inquiry promptly answered.
Address as above.




COPYRIGHTED 1883.




COUNTESS VERA;

OR,

_The Oath of Vengeance_.

By MRS. ALEX. McVEIGH MILLER.




CONTENTS


  COUNTESS VERA.
    CHAPTER I.
    CHAPTER II.
    CHAPTER III.
    CHAPTER IV.
    CHAPTER V.
    CHAPTER VI.
    CHAPTER VII.
    CHAPTER VIII.
    CHAPTER IX.
    CHAPTER X.
    CHAPTER XI.
    CHAPTER XII.
    CHAPTER XIII.
    CHAPTER XIV.
    CHAPTER XV.
    CHAPTER XVI.
    CHAPTER XVII.
    CHAPTER XVIII.
    CHAPTER XIX.
    CHAPTER XX.
    CHAPTER XXI.
    CHAPTER XXII.
    CHAPTER XXIII.
    CHAPTER XXIV.
    CHAPTER XXV.
    CHAPTER XXVI.
    CHAPTER XXVII.
    CHAPTER XXVIII.
    CHAPTER XXIX.
    CHAPTER XXX.
    CHAPTER XXXI.
    CHAPTER XXXII.
    CHAPTER XXXIII.
    CHAPTER XXXIV.
    CHAPTER XXXV.
    CHAPTER XXXVI.
    CHAPTER XXXVII.
    CHAPTER XXXVIII.
    CHAPTER XXXIX.
    CHAPTER XL.
    CHAPTER XLI.
    CHAPTER XLII.
    CHAPTER XLIII.
    CHAPTER XLIV.
    CHAPTER XLV.
    CHAPTER XLVI.
    CHAPTER XLVII.
    CHAPTER XLVIII.
    CHAPTER XLIX.
  THE MYSTERIOUS BEAUTY.




CHAPTER I.


"Dead!"

Leslie Noble reels backward, stunned by the shuddering horror of that
one word--"_Dead_!" The stiff, girlish characters of the open letter
in his hand waver up and down before his dazed vision, so that he can
scarcely read the pathetic words, _so_ pathetic now when the little
hand that penned them lies cold in death.

"Dear Leslie," it says, "when you come to bid me good-bye in the
morning I shall be dead. That is best. You see, I did not know till
to-night my sad story, and that you did not love me. Poor mamma was
wrong to bind you so. I am very sorry, Leslie. There is nothing I can
do but _die_."

There is no signature to the sad little letter--none--but they have
taken it from the hand of his girl-wife, found dead in her bed this
morning--his bride of two days agone.

With a shudder of unutterable horror, his glance falls on the lovely,
girlish face, lying still and cold with the marble mask of death on
its beauty. A faint tinge of the rose lingers still on the delicate
lips, the long, curling fringe of the lashes lies darkly against the
white cheeks, the rippling, waving, golden hair falls in billows of
brightness over the pillow. This was his unloved bride, and she has
died the awful and tragic death of the _suicide_.

       *       *       *       *       *

Let us go back a little in the story of this mournful tragedy, my
reader, go back to the upper chamber of that stately mansion, where, on
a wild night in October, a woman lay dying--dying of that subtle malady
beyond all healing--a broken heart.

"Vera, my darling," says the weak, faint voice, "come to me, dear."

A little figure that has been kneeling with its face in the
bed-clothes, rises and comes forward. The small, white face is drenched
with tears, the dark eyes are dim and heavy.

"Mamma," the soft voice says, hopefully, "you are better?"

The wasted features of the invalid contract with pain.

"No, my little daughter," she sighs, "I shall never be any better in
this world. I am dying."

A stifled cry of pain, and the girl's soft cheek is pressed to hers in
despairing love.

"No, mamma, no," she wails. "You must not die and leave me alone."

"Alone?" the mother re-echoes. "Beautiful, poor and alone in the great,
cruel world--oh, my God!"

"You cannot be dying, mamma," the girl says, hopefully. "They--Mrs.
Cleveland and Miss Ivy--could not go on to their balls and operas if
you were as bad as _that_!"

Something of bitter scorn touches the faded beauty of the woman's face
a moment.

"Much they would care," she says, in a tone of scorn. "At this moment
my sister and her proud daughter are dancing and feasting at the
Riverton's ball, utterly careless and indifferent to the fact that the
poor dependent is lying here all alone, but for her poor, friendless
child."

"You were no dependent, mamma," the girl says, with a gleam of pride in
her dark eyes. "You worked hard for all we have had. But, mamma, if--if
you _leave_ me, I will not be Ivy Cleveland's slave any longer. I shall
go away."

"Where, dear?" the mother asks, anxiously.

"Somewhere," vaguely; "anywhere, away from these wicked Clevelands. I
hate them, mamma!" she says, with sudden passion in her voice and face.

"You do not hate Leslie Noble?" Mrs. Campbell asks, anxiously.

"No, mamma, for though he is akin to them he is unlike them. Mr. Noble
is always kind to me," Vera answers, musingly.

"Listen to me, Vera, child. Mr. Noble l--likes you. He wishes to marry
you," the mother exclaims, with a flush of excitement in her eyes.

"Marry me?" Vera repeats, a little blankly.

"Yes, dear. Are you willing?"

"I--I am too young, am I not, mamma?"

"Seventeen, dear. As old as I was when I married your father," Mrs.
Campbell answers with a look of heart pain flitting over the pallid
face.

"I have never thought of marrying," Vera goes on musingly. "He will not
be angry if I refuse, will he, mamma?"

"But, Vera, you must not refuse," the invalid cries out, in a sudden
spasm of feverish anxiety. "Your future will be settled if you marry
Mr. Noble. I can die in peace, leaving you in the care of a good
husband. Oh, my darling, you do not know what a cruel world this is.
I dare not leave you alone, my pure, white lamb, amid its terrible
dangers."

Exhausted by her eager speech she breaks into a terrible fit of
coughing. Vera bends over, penitent and loving.

"Cheer up, mamma," she whispers; "I am not going to refuse him. Since
he wants me, I will marry him for your sake, dear."

"But you like him, Vera?" the mother asks, with piteous pleading.

"Oh, yes," calmly. "He is very nice, isn't he? But, do you know, I
think, mamma, that Ivy intended to marry him herself. I heard her say
so."

"Yes, I know, but you see he preferred you, my darling," the mother
answers, with whitening lips.

"Then I will marry him. How angry my cousin will be," Vera answers,
with all the calmness of a heart untouched by the _grande passion_.

"Yes, she will be very angry, but you need not care, dear," Mrs.
Campbell answers faintly. "Leslie will take you away from here. You
will never have to slave for the Clevelands any more."

The door opens suddenly and softly. A tall, handsome man comes into the
room, followed by a clerical-looking individual.

"Oh, Leslie, you are come back again," Mrs. Campbell breathes,
joyfully. "I am glad, for I cannot last but a few minutes longer."

"Not so bad as that, I hope," he says, gently, advancing to the
bedside; then his hand touches lightly the golden head bowed on the
pillow. "Is my little bride ready yet?" he asks.

The girl starts up with a pale, bewildered face.

"Is it to be now?" she asks, blankly. "I thought--I thought----"

But Mrs. Campbell, drawing her quickly down, checks the half protest
with a feverish kiss.

"Yes, dear, it is to be now," she whispers, weakly. "I cannot die until
I know that you will be safe from the Clevelands. It is my dying wish,
Vera."

"Then I am ready," Vera answers, turning a pale and strangely-solemn
face on the waiting bridegroom.

The bridegroom is pale, too. His handsome face gleams out as pale as
marble in the flickering glare of the lamps, the dark hair tossed
carelessly back from the high, white brow, gleaming like ebony in the
dim light. The dark, mustached lips are set in a grave and thoughtful
line, the dark blue eyes look curiously into the bride's white face
as he takes her passive hand and draws her forward toward the waiting
minister.

It is a strange bridal. There are no wedding-favors, no wedding-robes,
no congratulations. The beautiful marriage words sound very solemn
there in the presence of the dying, and the girlish bride turns
silently from the side of the new-made husband to seek the arms of her
dying mother.

"Bless you, my Vera, my little darling," the pale lips whisper, and
then there falls a strange shadow on the room, and a strange silence,
for, with the murmured words of blessing, the chords of life have
gently parted in twain, and Mrs. Campbell's broken heart is at rest and
at peace in that Heavenly peace that "passeth all understanding."




CHAPTER II.


The long, wintry night wanes slowly. Vera's own loving hands have
robed the dead for the rest of the grave. She has gone away now to
the solitude of her own little chamber under the eaves, leaving Leslie
Noble keeping watch beside the loved lost one.

She has forgotten for a moment the brief and solemn words that gave
her away to be a wife in her early innocent girlhood; she remembers
only that the one creature that loved her, and whom she loved, is
dead. Crushed to earth by her terrible loss, Vera flings herself
face downward on the chilly, uncarpeted floor, and lies there mute,
moveless, tearless, stricken into silence by the weight of her bitter
despair.

Who that has lost a mother, the one true heart that loves us truly and
unselfishly of all the world, but can sympathize with the bereaved
child in her deep despair.

In vain the kind-hearted minister whispered words of comfort, in
vain Leslie tried to soothe her, and win her to tears, in awe of her
strange, white face and dry-lidded eyes. They could not understand her,
and were fain to leave her alone, the while one quoted fearfully to the
other:

    "The grief that does not speak,
     Whispers the o'er-fraught heart and bids it break."

So the chilly night wanes, and at three o'clock in the morning,
carriage wheels echo loudly in the street below, and pause in front of
the house. The haughty mistress, and Ivy, her daughter, have returned
from the esthetic ball whose delights they could not forego, although
their relative lay ill unto death in the house.

A tap at Vera's door, and Mrs. Brown, the chamber-maid, glances in.
The worthy woman has been out at "a party" herself, and is quite
unconscious of all that has happened since she left the house. Her
stolid gaze falls curiously on the recumbent figure on the cold, hard
floor.

"Wake up, Miss Vera! Whatever be you a-sleeping on the cold floor this
night for? Miss Ivy says for you to come down to her room immejitly."

Disdaining a reply to the coarse woman, Vera drags herself up from the
hard floor, and with stiffened limbs takes her way to the luxurious
apartment of her cousin.

How different this large and comfortable room from Vera's bare and
fireless little den. Miss Cleveland's apartment has soft hangings
of pale-blue plush, bordered with silver, cream lace curtains, a
blue satin counterpane embroidered with silvery water-lilies. The
atmosphere is warm and dreamy, and languid with the scent of hot-house
flowers in blue and silver vases. The mistress of all this elegance
stands in the center of the room, clothed in an esthetic gown of
pale-blue, embroidered down the front with small sunflowers. She is a
pretty blonde, with straw-colored hair in loose waves, and turquoise
blue eyes, that usually wear an expression of infantine appeal and
innocence. Just now the eyes look heavy and dull, and there is a tired,
impatient look on her delicate-featured face.

"Here you are _at last_," she says, as Vera comes slowly in with her
white face and heavy eyes, with their look of dumb and hopeless pain.
"Hurry up now and undress me; I'm tired and sleepy, and ready to drop!"

Vera stands still, looking gravely at her, and making no move to obey
the cool and insolent mandate. For years her cousin has ruthlessly
trampled her under foot, and made her a despised slave.

It comes to the girl with a sudden thrill of triumph now that this is
the last time Ivy will ever order her about. She is Leslie Noble's
wife, and he will shield her from her cousin's abuse.

"Come, don't stand staring like a fool," Ivy breaks out coarsely and
impatiently. "Don't you see I'm waiting? Here, pull off these tight
slippers. I cannot stand them a minute longer!"

She throws herself into a blue-cushioned chair, and thrusts forward her
small feet encased in white kid slippers and blue silk hose, and Vera,
conquering her strong impulse of rebellion, kneels down to perform the
menial service.

After all, what does this last time matter? she asks herself, wearily.
After to-morrow she will be out of their power. Tonight, while that
dear, dead mother lies in the house, she will keep still, she will
have peace, no matter how bitter the cup of degradation pressed to her
loathing lips.

With steady hands she unlaces the silken cords that lace the white
slippers, draws them off the compressed feet, and unclasps the satin
garters from the blue silken hose. All the while Ivy raves angrily:

"I have seen for some time that you rebel against waiting on me,
ungrateful minx, as if all you could do would repay us for the
charity that has clothed and fed you all your life. To-morrow I shall
report you to your mother, and if she does not bring you into better
subjection, you shall both be driven away, do you hear?"

Her mother! This is the iron rod with which they have ruled poor Vera
all her life long. That poor, drooping, delicate mother, whose hold
on life had never been but half-hearted, whose only home and shelter
had been the grudging and hard-earned charity of her heartless and
parsimonious sister. Day in and day out the Clevelands had driven their
two weak slaves relentlessly, always holding over their heads the dread
of being turned out to face the cold world alone.

A low and bitter laugh rises to Vera's lips at the thought that that
poor, meek dependent is beyond their dominion now, and that Ivy's
threatened complaints can never rise to that high Heaven where her
mother's freed spirit soars in happiness and peace.

"Not that you are of much account, anyway," pursues the heartless girl,
angrily. "You can never be trained into a proper maid, you stiff-necked
little pauper. If mamma were not so mean and stingy she would let me
have a real French maid like other girls. Never mind, when once I am
Mrs. Leslie Noble I'll show her how I will spend money!"

Vera shivers, and her heart thumps heavily against her side. The
one idea of Ivy's life is to marry Leslie Noble. He is handsome,
fascinating, wealthy, in short, her _beau ideal_ of perfection. He has
come on a month's visit to her mother from a distant city, and both
_mater_ and daughter are sure, quite sure, that the object for which
he was invited is accomplished; they have hooked the golden fish, they
have no doubt. What will Ivy say when she knows that she, the despised
Vera, is Leslie Noble's chosen bride?

"She will kill me, just that!" the girl murmurs to herself in terror,
while a second terror shakes her slight frame.

"What are you trembling for?" Ivy demands, shortly. "Are you afraid I
will slap you as I did last night? Well, you richly deserve it, and I
don't know but that I may. Hurry, now, and fix my hair and bring my
_robe de nuit_. It will be broad daylight before I get into bed. And I
want to rise early to find out why Leslie did not come to the ball."

Vera moves about mechanically, obeying orders, but answering never a
word.

A golden gleam has come into the eyes beneath the drooping lashes, a
heavy, deep red spot glows in the center of her death-white cheeks.
Half-frightened as she is at the thought of Ivy's rage when she learns
the truth, she is yet filled with triumph at the thought of her own
vengeance on her enemies, this glorious vengeance that has come to her
unsought.

_She_ will be Leslie Noble's wife, she will queen it over Ivy and her
mother. She will wear satin and laces and diamonds, she will have
French maids to wait on her, and then a sudden anguished recollection
drives the blood from her heart and forces a moan of despair from her
white lips--what is all her triumph since it cannot bring back the dead?

She is moving to the door, having tucked the blue satin counterpane
about Ivy's small figure, when the straw-gold head pops up, and the
frivolous beauty recalls her.

"I say, Vera, is the embroidery finished on my Surah polonaise? Because
I shall want it to-morrow night to wear to Mrs. Montague's _german_.
Tell your mother I shall want it without fail. I am tired of this
shamming sickness. It's nothing but laziness--just _that_. Did you say
it was finished?"

"No," Vera answers her, through her white lips. Ivy springs up
tumultuously in the bed.

"Not finished!" she screams, shrilly.

"Scandalous! I tell you I want it to-morrow night! I will have it--you
hear! Go and tell your mother to get up this instant and go to work at
it. Go and tell her--you hear?"

Vera, with her hands on the latch, and that crimson spot burning dully
on her cheeks, answers with sudden, passionate defiance:

"I will not!"

All in a moment Ivy is out of bed, and her small, claw-like fingers
clutch Vera's arm, the other hand comes down in a ringing slap on
Vera's cheek.

"Take that, little vixen!" she hisses, furiously, "and that, and that!
How dare you defy me?"

Vera pushes her off with a sudden passionate defiance.

"Because I am not afraid of you any longer," she says, sharply.
"Because poor mamma has escaped you. She is free--she is dead!"

"Dead!" Ivy screams in passionate wrath. "Dead--and the embroidery
not finished on my Surah polonaise! It is just like her--the lazy,
ungrateful thing! To go and die just when I needed----"

But Vera slams the door between her and the rest of the heartless
lament, and flies along the hall laughing like some mad thing. In truth
the horrors of this dreadful night have almost unseated her reason. She
shuts and bolts herself into her room, her young heart filled with wild
hatred for her heartless cousin.

"To-morrow I shall have my revenge upon her," she cries, with clenched
hands. "I would not tell her to-night. My triumph would not have been
complete. I will wait--wait until to-morrow, when Leslie Noble will
take me by the hand and tell her to her face that he loves me, and that
I am his wife!"

And her strange, half-maddened laugh filled the little room with weird
echoes.




CHAPTER III.


To-morrow, Vera's to-morrow--dawns, rainy, chilly, cheerless, as only a
rainy autumn day can be. The wild winds sigh eerily around the house.
The autumn leaves are beaten from the trees and swirl through the air,
falling in dank, sodden masses on the soaked grass of the lawn. The sun
refuses to shine. No more dreary and desolate day could be imagined.

With the earliest peep of dawn Vera makes her way to her mother's room.

It is lonely and deserted save for the sheeted presence of the quiet
dead. The lamps burn dimly, and there is a silence in the room so deep
it may be felt.

With a trembling hand Vera turns down the cold linen cover for one
long, lingering look at the beloved face--the strangely-beautiful
marble-white face, on which the story of a life-long sorrow has carved
its mournful record in the subtle tracery of grief.

Mrs. Campbell has been that most sorrowful of all living creatures--a
deserted wife!

The beautiful, dark eyes of her daughter have never looked upon the
face of the father who should have loved and nurtured her tender life.

But it is all over now--the pain, the sorrow, the loneliness, the deep
humiliation. The small, toil-stained hands are folded gently together
over some odorous white tube-roses that Vera has placed within them!

The jetty fringe of the long, black lashes rests heavily against the
thin, white cheeks, the beautifully-curved lips are closed peacefully,
the golden brown hair, thickly-streaked with gray, is parted sweetly on
the peaceful brow.

As Vera gazes, the tears, which have remained sealed in their fountains
till now, burst forth in healing showers, breaking upon the terrible
calm that has been upon her.

Again and again she presses her hot, feverish lips to the cold, white
brow of the only friend her lonely life has ever known.

"Oh, mamma, mamma, if you might but have taken me with you," she sobs,
bitterly.

"The best thing that could have happened," says a curt, icy voice
behind her, and turning with a shiver of repulsion, Vera beholds
her aunt, Mrs. Cleveland, who has entered noiselessly in her furred
slippers and crimson dressing-gown.

She comes to the foot of the bed and stands silently a moment regarding
the cold, white features of her dead sister, then hastily turns her
head aside as if the still face held some unspoken reproach for her.

"Cover the face, Vera," she says, coldly. "It is not pleasant to look
at the dead."

"Not when we have wronged them," the girl murmurs, almost inaudibly,
and with deep bitterness.

"What is that you are saying?" demands Mrs. Cleveland, sharply. "'Not
when we have wronged them,' eh? Beware, girl, how you let that sharp
tongue of yours run on. You may chance to see the inside of the
alms-house!"

But Vera, biting her lips fiercely, in mute shame at that angry slip of
the tongue in presence of the dead, makes no answer. Dropping the white
sheet back over the sealed lips that cannot open to defend her child,
she buries her face in the pillow, trembling all over with indignation
and grief.

Mrs. Cleveland stands contemplating her a moment with a look of
contemptuous scorn on her high, Roman features, then, to Vera's
amazement, she exclaims:

"One of the servants told me that Leslie Noble brought a preacher in
here last night. Was it to administer the sacrament to the dying?"

No answer from Vera, whose face remains buried in the pillow.

"Speak!" Mrs. Cleveland commands, coming a step nearer, "did he come to
administer the consolations of religion to the dying?"

"No," Vera answers, lifting her white face a moment, and looking
steadily into her enemy's questioning eyes. "No."

"No," Mrs. Cleveland echoes, with a look of alarm. "What then, girl,
what then?"

But Vera, with the strange reply, "You must ask Mr. Noble--he will
inform you," drops her pallid face into her hands again.

Mrs. Cleveland makes a step forward, resolving in her own mind "to
shake the breath out of that stubborn girl," but even her wicked nature
is awed by the still presence of death in the room, and she desists
from her heartless purpose, and, retreating to the door, pauses with
her hand on the latch to say, icily:

"Your mother's funeral will take place from the Epiphany Church this
afternoon. Mourning garments will be sent to your room for you to wear."

Vera springs to her feet with a heart-wrung cry:

"So soon! Oh, my God, you will not bury her out of my sight to-day,
when she only died last night!"

Mrs. Cleveland's haughty features are convulsed with anger.

"Hush, you little fool!" she bursts out, angrily. "Do you think that
dead people are such enlivening company that one need keep them in the
house any longer than is necessary to provide a hearse and coffin? Only
died last night, forsooth! Well, she is as dead now as she will be a
hundred years hence, and the funeral will take place this afternoon.
You will be ready to attend, if you understand what is good for
yourself."

So saying, she sweeps from the room, slamming the door heavily behind
her.

Alas, the bitterness of poverty and dependence. Vera throws herself
down by the side of the bed, and weeps long and bitterly, until
exhausted nature succumbs to the strain upon it, and she sleeps deeply,
heavily, dreamlessly, wrapped in a dumb, narcotic stupor rather than
healthful slumber. She is hustled out of the way at length that her
mother may be placed in the plain coffin that has been provided for
her, and a few hours later--oh, so piteously few--she is standing by
that open grave in Glenwood, hearing the dull thud of the earth, and
the patter of the rain upon the coffin, and the solemn voice of the
minister, repeating in tones that sound faint and far away to her dazed
senses, "Ashes to ashes, and dust to dust."

From her carriage, where she sits impatiently waiting the conclusion
of the sacred service, Mrs. Cleveland watches the scene, frowning
impatiently at the sight of Leslie Noble supporting Vera on his arm,
and holding his umbrella carefully over her, reckless of the rain-drops
that patter down on his uncovered head and face. Mrs. Cleveland does
not like the look of it at all. She regards Leslie as Ivy's own
especial property. Leslie is too kind-hearted. Why should he trouble
himself over Vera Campbell, her despised niece, who is no better
than a servant to Ivy, her idolized daughter. She does not like the
look of it at all, and when Leslie hands the sobbing girl into the
carriage, and takes a seat by her side instead of Mrs. Cleveland's, the
matron's vexation rises into almost uncontrollable rage. Biting her
lips fiercely, she resolves that as soon as they reach home she will
give the young man a broad hint to cease his little kindnesses in that
quarter.

The occasion comes very soon. It is almost dark when they reach home.
The gas is lighted and a cheerful fire glows in the luxurious parlor.

Mr. Noble leads his passive companion deliberately in, and installs her
in a cushioned seat before the fire. With deft fingers he removes the
heavy veil and hat, the black shawl, and the wet gloves, and chafes in
his own warm clasp the half-frozen little fingers.

"Upon my word!" drawls a thin little voice, full of anger and surprise.

Mr. Leslie, glancing up, sees Ivy reclining on a couch, and regarding
the scene with supercilious surprise commingled with anger. Mrs.
Cleveland, who has followed them into the room, stands still, a mute
statue of rage and dismay.

"I--I should like to know the meaning of this, Mr. Noble," she gasps at
length, haughtily. "I do not allow that girl in my parlor! Let her go
to the servants' room. They are good enough for the likes of her."

Mr. Leslie turns his pale, handsome face round with an air of surprise.

"She is your sister's child," he says, with reproach in every tone of
his voice.

"Yes, to my sorrow," Mrs. Cleveland flashes out. "Add to that that she
is a pauper and an ingrate! Vera Campbell, get up and go to your own
room. _You_ ought to know your place if Mr. Noble does not!"

Vera rises silently, and standing still a moment, looks up into Leslie
Noble's face. The supreme moment of her triumph has arrived. With a
nervous tremor she looks up into his face for courage to sustain her in
the trying ordeal of the Clevelands' wrath before its vials are poured
out upon her shrinking head.

But the expression of the handsome, troubled face does not exactly
satisfy her. He is not looking at her. His eyes are fixed on Ivy
Cleveland's pretty face with its pink cheeks and turquoise-blue eyes.
There is tenderness, regret and trouble in the rather weak though
handsome face.

"Go, Vera," Mrs. Cleveland reiterates, sternly and impatiently.

Then Leslie's eyes fall on the slight, black-robed figure standing in
silent, proud humility by his side.

He stoops over her, not to caress her, as for a moment she vaguely
fancied, but to whisper in her ear:

"Do as she bids you this time, Vera. Go to your room and sleep soundly
to-night. I will have it out with her now, and in the morning I will
take you away."

She flashes one quick glance into his troubled eyes, bows her head, and
goes mutely from the room. But something in that look haunts Leslie
Noble ever after. It seemed to him as if those dark eyes said to him
plainer than words could speak: "You are a coward. Are you not afraid
to acknowledge your wife?" He is right. The look in her eyes has been
palpable contempt.

She goes from the room, but only to enter the room adjoining the
parlor, and conceal herself behind the heavy, dark-green hangings. So
this is the grand triumph her imagination has pictured for her. This is
the weak way in which her husband takes her part against the world.




CHAPTER IV.


When Vera has gone from the room, an embarrassed silence falls. Mrs.
Cleveland is wondering what to say next. It is no part of her plan to
offend Leslie Noble. She prefers to conciliate him. For Leslie himself,
he is wondering in what terms he shall convey the truth to his arrogant
relative and her haughty daughter.

"You must not take offense, Leslie, at my interference in this case,"
Mrs. Cleveland stammers at length. "I know your kind, easy nature, and
I cannot tamely see you imposed upon by that wretched girl, who is the
most ungrateful and hard-hearted creature you could imagine, and only
fit to herd with the low and vulgar."

"I do not understand you," Mr. Noble answers, resting his arms on the
back of the chair, and turning on her a white, perplexed face.

"She comes of bad stock," answered Mrs. Cleveland. "Her mother, my
sister, married most wretchedly beneath her. The man was a low,
drunken, brutal fellow, with nothing under Heaven to recommend him but
a handsome face. As might have been expected, he abused and maltreated
his wife, and then deserted her just before the birth of his daughter,
who resembled him exceedingly in character as well as in person."

Leslie Noble winces. Pride of birth is a strong point with him. He is
exceedingly well-born himself. The story of this drunken, wife-beating
fellow thrills him with keenest disgust.

"Where is the fellow now--dead?" he asks anxiously.

"No, indeed; at least, not that I ever heard of," Mrs. Cleveland
answers. "I have no doubt he is alive somewhere, in state prison,
perhaps, and he will turn up some day to claim his daughter, and drag
her down to his own vile depths of degradation."

Mr. Noble is silent from sheer inability to speak, and Mrs. Cleveland
resumes, with apparent earnestness:

"I have my doubts whether I am acting right in keeping the girl
here. She is a dead expense to me, and the most ungrateful and
violent-tempered creature that ever lived. Would you believe that she
flew at poor, dear little Ivy, and boxed her ears this morning? My pity
and affection for my sister induced me to give them a home as long as
she lived, but now that her influence is withdrawn from Vera, she will
be perfectly unmanageable. I think I shall send her away."

"Where?" inquires Mr. Noble, trying to keep his eyes from the pink and
white face of Ivy, who is listening intently to every word, without
speaking herself.

"To some place where she may earn her own living, or, perhaps, to the
House of Correction. She sadly needs discipline," is the instant reply.

Leslie Noble's face turns from white to red, and from red to white
again. What he has heard has utterly dismayed him.

"I wish that I had known all this yesterday, or last night," he
mutters, weakly.

"Why?" Mrs. Cleveland asks, startled by the dejected tone.

Leslie Noble looks from her to Ivy, who has started into a sitting
posture, and fixed her blue eyes on his face.

"Because I have something shocking to tell you," he answers, growing
very pale. "You must not be angry with me, Mrs. Cleveland, nor you,
Ivy. It would not have happened if I had known all that I know now."

"Oh, what can you mean?" screams Ivy, startled into speech by her vague
fear.

"You remember that I declined the Riverton's ball last night on the
score of a violent headache?" he says, looking gravely at her.

"Yes, and I missed you _so_ much. I did not enjoy the ball _one bit_,"
she murmurs, sentimentally.

Mr. Noble sighs furiously.

"I wish that I had gone, no matter how hard my head ached," he says,
dejectedly. "Then Mrs. Campbell would never have sent for me to come to
her room."

"To come to her room!" mother and daughter echo in breathless
indignation.

"Yes," answers the young man, with another sigh.

"Impertinent! What did she wish?" Mrs. Cleveland breaks out, furiously,
pale to the lips.

"She wished to tell me that she was dying, and to leave her daughter in
my care," he stammers, confusedly.

"Go on," Mrs. Cleveland exclaims.

"She told me that Vera was delicate, sensitive, helpless and
friendless, and so good and sweet that none could help loving her. She
declared she could not die in peace without leaving her in the care of
a kind protector."

"A fine protector a young man would make for a young girl," Mrs.
Cleveland sneers, with cutting irony.

"You do not understand, I think," Leslie answers her, gravely. "She
wished me to make her my wife."

"Your wife! Marry Vera Campbell!" Ivy shrieks out wildly.

He trembles at the passionate dismay of her voice, but answers,
desperately:

"Vera Noble, now, Ivy, for her mother's grief overcame my reason, and I
made her my wife last night by the side of her dying mother."




CHAPTER V.


Following that desperate declaration from Leslie Noble, there is a
scream of rage and anguish commingled. Ivy has fallen back on the sofa
in violent hysterics. Mrs. Cleveland glares at him reproachfully.

"You have killed her, my poor Ivy!" she cries. "She loved you, and you
had given her reason to think that--you meant to marry _her_."

"I _did_ so intend," he answers, on the spur of the moment. "I was only
waiting to be sure of my feelings before I declared myself. But now,
this dreadful marriage has blighted my life and hers. Poor little Ivy."

"I could almost curse my sister in her grave!" Mrs. Cleveland wails,
wringing her hands.

"Curse me rather," Leslie answers, bitterly, "that I was weak enough to
be deluded into such a mesalliance. She was ill and dying, she barely
knew what she did; but I was in full possession of my senses. Why did
I let my weak pity overcome me, and make me false to the real desire of
my heart?"

"Falsest, most deceitful of men!" sobs Ivy from her sofa, and Leslie
takes her white hand a moment in his own, pressing it despairingly to
his lips as he cries:

"You must forgive me, Ivy, I did not know how well I loved you until I
had lost you."

Mrs. Cleveland interposes sternly.

"Come, come, I cannot allow any tender passages between you two. If
Leslie intends for this nefarious marriage to stand, it will be best
that he shall remain a stranger henceforth to us both."

"To stand?" Leslie repeats, looking at her like one dazed.

"Yes," she answers, meaningly. "I ask you, Leslie, if such a marriage
as this can be legal and binding?"

"Oh, yes, it is perfectly so," he answers.

"Do you love her? Oh, Leslie, do you love that dreadful girl?" wails
Ivy, from her sofa.

He shakes his head, Mrs. Cleveland having interdicted other intercourse.

"Do you intend to live with her?" Mrs. Cleveland queries, significantly.

"Pray, what else can I do?" Mr. Noble queries, bewildered, and Ivy
groans, lugubriously.

"Oh, nothing, nothing," the lady answers, with a scornful laugh. "But
if it were me who had been deluded into such a marriage with a low and
mercenary girl, I am sure that nothing could induce me to live with
her. I would either divorce her, or pension her off."

Mr. Noble walks up and down the floor with folded arms, in deep
agitation.

"It would be quite impossible to procure a divorce," he answers, after
a moment's thought. "I could assign no earthly cause for demanding
one. I married her of my own free will, though I admit I was unduly
persuaded."

"All she cares for is your money," snaps Ivy, quite ignoring the fact
that this was her own motive for winning him. "It will kill me if you
take her home with you, Leslie. I shall die of a broken heart."

"Poor, deceived dear," sighs her mother, while Leslie breaks out,
ruefully:

"What else can I possibly do, Ivy?"

Mrs. Cleveland, who had been silently cogitating, answers with sudden
blandness:

"If you want my advice, Leslie, you shall have it, unfairly as you have
treated us. I say the girl is ignorant and uneducated, and quite unfit
to become the mistress of your elegant home in Philadelphia. If you are
compelled to stick to your unlucky bargain, you must try and make the
best of it. You will have to put her into a strict convent school where
her ill-nature will be tamed down, and her manners educated up to the
proper standard for your wife. How do you like that plan?"

Her magnetic gaze is fixed on Ivy as she speaks, compelling her to be
silent, though she was raising her shrill voice in protest.

"Would they be harsh with her?" Leslie asks anxiously, some instinct of
pity for the orphan girl struggling blindly in his heart.

"Not at all. I was educated at a convent school myself. I liked it
very much. But you will have to be very positive about Vera, to induce
her to go. She will wheedle you out of the notion if possible. Raw,
untrained girl as she is, she thinks she is quite capable of doing
anything, or filling any position. But if you listen to _her_, you will
find yourself mortified and disgraced directly," blandly insinuates the
wily woman.

Leslie Noble winces as she had meant he should. He is very proud and
sensitive, this rich, handsome man who finds himself placed, through
his weakness, in such a sore strait.

"I think your plan is a very good one," he says, hastily. "Do you know
where there is a school, such as you named just now?"

"I can give you the address of one in Maryland," Mrs. Cleveland
answers, readily.

"I will go there to-morrow and make arrangements for her reception as a
pupil," he replies. "Would it be better to apprise her of my intention
beforehand?" he inquires with some embarrassment.

"No, decidedly not. She might find means to circumvent you. She is
a very sharp witted girl. Merely tell her that you are called away
unexpectedly, on business, and that you will leave her in my charge
until you return."

"Would it be agreeable to you to have her stay that long?" he queries.

Mrs. Cleveland smiles a little grimly.

"Of course, as your wife, Vera may expect every courtesy from me," she
answers in a strange kind of voice, and there the conference ends.

From her hiding-place in the adjoining room Vera creeps out with a
white face, and takes her way up-stairs to her mother's room. Her step
is slow and heavy, her eyes are dull and black, there is no single
gleam of brightness in them. The last drop has been added to the
already overflowing cup of misery and despair.

With an unfaltering hand she goes to a small medicine chest kept for
her mother's use, and unlocking it, takes out two small vials filled
with a dark-colored liquid. Each vial has a label pasted on, containing
written directions for use, but without the name of the drug.

Vera knits her straight, black brows thoughtfully together as she
puzzles over them. "I remember," she says, aloud, "that mamma said one
would produce a long, deep sleep, the other--death! Now which is which?"

After a minute she decides to her satisfaction, and placing one vial
back, goes away with the other in her bosom. In her own little room
she sits down to pen a few words to Leslie, then slowly kneels by the
bedside.

"I do not think anyone can blame me," she murmurs, "not even God. The
world is so cold and hard I cannot live in it any longer. I am going to
my mother."

Some broken, pleading words falter over the quivering, white lips, then
a low amen.

She rises, puts the treasured vial to her lips, and drains the last
bitter drop, throwing the empty vessel on the hearth where it cracks
into a hundred fragments. Then she lies down upon the bed with her
letter to Leslie clenched tightly in her slim white hand. And when they
come to awake her in the morning, she is lying mute and pale, with the
marble mask of death over all her beauty.




CHAPTER VI.


When they tell Leslie Noble the fatal truth--when they lead him to the
cold, bare chamber where his girl-wife lies dead, he is stunned by the
swift and terrible blow that the hand of fate has dealt him. A quick
remorse has entered his soul. He did not love her, yet he would not
have the light of her young, strong life go out in darkness like that.

Though he has walked the floor of his room all night, raving, and
almost cursing himself because he had married her, the sight of her
now--like _that_--and the sad pathos of that brief letter touch him to
the depths of his heart with a vain remorse and pity. With a faltering
voice he reads aloud the sad and hopeless words:

"When you come to bid me good-by in the morning I shall be dead. That
is best. You see, I did not know till to-night my sad story, and
that--that you did not love me! Poor mamma was wrong to bind you so. I
am very sorry, Leslie. There is nothing I can do but die!"

His glance falls on Mrs. Cleveland, who is standing in the room with
a strange expression upon her face. He does not like to think it is
relief and satisfaction, and yet it is marvelously like it.

"Who has told her the truth? How has she learned it?" he asks. "I
never meant that she should know. I meant to do my duty by the poor,
friendless girl."

"No one told her. She must have listened at the door last night. It was
like her low, mean disposition to be peeping, and prying, and listening
to what did not concern her," Mrs. Cleveland bursts out, scornfully.

"Pardon me, but our conversation _did_ concern her," he answers,
gravely.

"At least, it was not intended for her hearing," she replies, shortly.

Mr. Noble is silent a moment, gazing earnestly at the pale, dead face,
from which the woman's eyes turn in fear and aversion.

"Perhaps we have wronged her," he says, slowly. "If she had been what
you believed her--coarse and low, and violent like her father--would
she have been driven," shudderingly, "to this!"

"You are allowing a maudlin sentimentality to run away with your
reason, Leslie," the woman answers, coldly. "Do you suppose I have
lied to you? The girl has lived here since infancy. I knew her temper
well, and I repeat that she was unbearable. I only endured her for her
mother's sake. This is very sad. Of course, you feel badly over it.
And yet, common sense whispers that this is a most fortunate thing for
you. You are freed from a galling bond. Had she lived, she would almost
inevitably have become a sorrow and a disgrace to you."

"We should not speak ill of the dead," he answers, a little sternly.

"Pardon me; I know there are some truths which we innately feel, but
should not give expression to," she answers, with keen irony.

"Does Ivy know?" he asks her.

"Not yet; poor dear, I have been watching by her bedside all night. She
is ill and almost heart-broken. I must go and break the news to her
now."

She moves to the door, but, seeing him standing irresolute in the
center of the floor, looks back over her shoulder to say, anxiously:

"Will you come away now, Leslie? The women would like to come in to
prepare the body for the grave."

He shivers, and turns to follow her, casting one long, lingering look
at the fair, immobile face upon the pillow.

"I did not know she was so beautiful," he murmurs to himself as he
passes out.

"Have you no message to send Ivy?" Mrs. Cleveland asks him, as they
pass along the hall. "She would be so glad of even one kind word from
you."

"I thought you interdicted all intercourse between us last night," he
answers, blankly.

"Yes; but the _obstacle_ no longer remains," she replies,
significantly, and, with a violent start, Leslie realizes the truth of
her words. In his horror and surprise he had not thought of it before.
Yes, Vera's death has set him free--free to marry Ivy when he will.

"Tell her that I am very sorry she is ill. I hope she will soon be
better," he answers, gravely and courteously. He will not say more now
out of respect to the dead, and Mrs. Cleveland is wise enough not to
press him.

Ivy, whose pretended illness is altogether a sham, is jubilant over the
news.

"Was there ever anything more fortunate?" she exclaims. "Lucky for us
that she listened, and found out the truth."

"Yes, indeed, she saved me a vast deal of plotting and planning, for
I was determined that she should be put out of the way somehow, and
that _soon_," Mrs. Cleveland answers, heartlessly. "The little fool! I
did not think she had the courage to kill herself, but I am very much
obliged to her."

"'Nothing in her life became her like the leaving it,'" Ivy quotes,
heartlessly.

"Remember, Ivy, you must not allow Leslie to perceive your joy. He
is very peculiar--weak-minded, indeed," scornfully. "And he might be
offended. Just now he is carried away by a maudlin sentimentality over
her tragic death."

"Never fear for me. I shall be discretion itself," laughs Ivy. "But, of
course, I shall make no display of grief. _That_ could not be expected."

"Of course not. But it will be a mark of respect to Leslie if you will
attend the funeral to-morrow."

"Then I will do so, with a proper show of decorum. I am determined that
he shall not slip through my fingers again."

So the two cruel and wicked women plot and plan, while the poor victim
of their heartlessness lies up-stairs dead, in all her young, winsome
beauty, with her small hands folded on her quiet heart, and the
black-fringed lashes lying heavily against the marble-white cheeks.
They have robed her for the grave, and left her there alone, with no
one "to come in and kiss her to lighten the gloom."

So the day wanes and the night, and Vera lies still and white in the
long black casket to which they have consigned her. They have left the
cover off, and only a transparent veil lies lightly across her face,
through which her delicate features show clearly. How wonderfully the
look of life lingers still; how the pink lips retain the warm, pink
coloring of life. But there is no one to note how wonderfully death has
spared her fairness; no one to exclaim, with the power of affection:

"She looks too sweet and life-like for us to bury her out of our sight."

Afternoon comes, and they carry the casket down into the parlor where a
little group are waiting to hear the brief service of the black-robed
minister. Then they gather around in the gloomy, darkened room, glance
shudderingly at the beautiful white face, and turn away, while the
stolid undertaker screws down the coffin-lid over the desperate young
suicide. After that the solemn, black-plumed hearse is waiting to bear
her away to her rest, by her mother's side. "Ashes to ashes, dust to
dust." "_Resquiescat in pace._"

       *       *       *       *       *

Leslie Noble goes home that night. In his character of a widower, he
must wait a little space before he renews his suit to the impatient Ivy.

"You will come back to me soon, Leslie dear?" she sighs, sentimentally,
as she clings to his arm.

"As soon as decorum permits me," he replies. "Will you wait for me
patiently, Ivy?"

"Yes, only do not stay too long," she answers, and he presses a light
kiss on her powdered forehead, which Ivy takes in good faith as the
solemn seal of their betrothal.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Oh, dear, it is very lonely," Ivy sighs, that evening, as she and her
mother sit alone in the luxurious parlor, where so late the presence
of death cast its pall of gloom. "I miss Leslie very much. Shall we be
obliged to seclude ourselves from all gaiety, mamma, just because those
two people--the plague of our lives--are dead?"

"I am afraid so--for awhile, at least, dear. People would think it
strange, you know, my dear Ivy, if we did not make some outward show
of grief," Mrs. Cleveland answers, thoughtfully, for she has been
turning the matter over in her own mind, and, like her daughter, she
cannot endure the thought of foregoing the daily round of fashionable
pleasures that are "meat and drink to her."

"How horrid!" complains Ivy. "I should die of the dismals! Listen,
mamma, I have a plan."

"Really?" Mrs. Cleveland asks, with faint sarcasm, for her daughter is
not at all clever.

"Yes, although you think I am so stupid," Ivy answers, vivaciously. "It
is this, mamma. Let us leave Washington and go south this winter to one
of the gayest, most fashi