Produced by Polly Stratton





THE TAVERN KNIGHT


By Rafael Sabatini



CONTENTS

     I.  ON THE MARCH

     II.  ARCADES AMBO

     III.  THE LETTER

     IV.  AT THE SIGN OF THE MITRE

     V.  AFTER WORCESTER FIELD

     VI.  COMPANIONS IN MISFORTUNE

     VII.  THE TAVERN KNIGHT'S STORY

     VIII.  THE TWISTED BAR

     IX.  THE BARGAIN

     X.  THE ESCAPE

     XI.  THE ASHBURNS

     XII.  THE HOUSE THAT WAS ROLAND MARLEIGH'S

     XIII.  THE METAMORPHOSIS OF KENNETH

     XIV.  THE HEART OF CYNTHIA ASHBURN

     XV.  JOSEPH'S RETURN

     XVI.  THE RECKONING

     XVII.  JOSEPH DRIVES A BARGAIN

     XVIII.  COUNTER-PLOT

     XIX.  THE INTERRUPTED JOURNEY

     XX.  THE CONVERTED HOGAN

     XXI.  THE MESSAGE KENNETH BORE

     XXII.  SIR CRISPIN'S UNDERTAKING

     XXIII.  GREGORY'S ATTRITION

     XXIV.  THE WOOING OF CYNTHIA

     XXV.  CYNTHIA'S FLIGHT

     XXVI.  TO FRANCE

     XXVII.  THE AUBERGINE DU SOLEIL





THE TAVERN KNIGHT




CHAPTER I. ON THE MARCH

He whom they called the Tavern Knight laughed an evil laugh--such a
laugh as might fall from the lips of Satan in a sardonic moment.

He sat within the halo of yellow light shed by two tallow candles, whose
sconces were two empty bottles, and contemptuously he eyed the youth
in black, standing with white face and quivering lip in a corner of
the mean chamber. Then he laughed again, and in a hoarse voice, sorely
suggestive of the bottle, he broke into song. He lay back in his chair,
his long, spare legs outstretched, his spurs jingling to the lilt of his
ditty whose burden ran:

          On the lip so red of the wench that's sped
          His passionate kiss burns, still-O!
          For 'tis April time, and of love and wine
          Youth's way is to take its fill-O!
          Down, down, derry-do!

          So his cup he drains and he shakes his reins,
          And rides his rake-helly way-O!
          She was sweet to woo and most comely, too,
          But that was all yesterday-O!
          Down, down, derry-do!

The lad started forward with something akin to a shiver.

“Have done,” he cried, in a voice of loathing, “or, if croak you must,
choose a ditty less foul!”

“Eh?” The ruffler shook back the matted hair from his lean, harsh
face, and a pair of eyes that of a sudden seemed ablaze glared at his
companion; then the lids drooped until those eyes became two narrow
slits--catlike and cunning--and again he laughed.

“Gad's life, Master Stewart, you have a temerity that should save
you from grey hairs! What is't to you what ditty my fancy seizes on?
'Swounds, man, for three weary months have I curbed my moods, and worn
my throat dry in praising the Lord; for three months have I been a
living monument of Covenanting zeal and godliness; and now that at last
I have shaken the dust of your beggarly Scotland from my heels, you--the
veriest milksop that ever ran tottering from its mother's lap would
chide me because, yon bottle being done, I sing to keep me from waxing
sad in the contemplation of its emptiness!”

There was scorn unutterable on the lad's face as he turned aside.

“When I joined Middleton's horse and accepted service under you, I held
you to be at least a gentleman,” was his daring rejoinder.

For an instant that dangerous light gleamed again from his companion's
eye. Then, as before, the lids drooped, and, as before, he laughed.

“Gentleman!” he mocked. “On my soul, that's good! And what may you know
of gentlemen, Sir Scot? Think you a gentleman is a Jack Presbyter, or a
droning member of your kirk committee, strutting it like a crow in
the gutter? Gadswounds, boy, when I was your age, and George Villiers
lived--”

“Oh, have done!” broke in the youth impetuously. “Suffer me to leave
you, Sir Crispin, to your bottle, your croaking, and your memories.”

“Aye, go your ways, sir; you'd be sorry company for a dead man--the
sorriest ever my evil star led me into. The door is yonder, and should
you chance to break your saintly neck on the stairs, it is like to be
well for both of us.”

And with that Sir Crispin Galliard lay back in his chair once more, and
took up the thread of his interrupted song

          But, heigh-o! she cried, at the Christmas-tide,
          That dead she would rather be-O!
          Pale and wan she crept out of sight, and wept

          'Tis a sorry--

A loud knock that echoed ominously through the mean chamber, fell in
that instant upon the door. And with it came a panting cry of--

“Open, Cris! Open, for the love of God!”

Sir Crispin's ballad broke off short, whilst the lad paused in the act
of quitting the room, and turned to look to him for direction.

“Well, my master,” quoth Galliard, “for what do you wait?”

“To learn your wishes, sir,” was the answer sullenly delivered.

“My wishes! Rat me, there's one without whose wishes brook less waiting!
Open, fool!”

Thus rudely enjoined, the lad lifted the latch and set wide the door,
which opened immediately upon the street. Into the apartment stumbled a
roughly clad man of huge frame. He was breathing hard, and fear was writ
large upon his rugged face. An instant he paused to close the door after
him, then turning to Galliard, who had risen and who stood eyeing him in
astonishment--

“Hide me somewhere, Cris,” he panted--his accent proclaiming his Irish
origin. “My God, hide me, or I'm a dead man this night!”

“'Slife, Hogan! What is toward? Has Cromwell overtaken us?”

“Cromwell, quotha? Would to Heaven 'twere no worse! I've killed a man!”

“If he's dead, why run?”

The Irishman made an impatient gesture.

“A party of Montgomery's foot is on my heels. They've raised the whole
of Penrith over the affair, and if I'm taken, soul of my body, 'twill be
a short shrift they'll give me. The King will serve me as poor Wrycraft
was served two days ago at Kendal. Mother of Mercy!” he broke off,
as his ear caught the clatter of feet and the murmur of voices from
without. “Have you a hole I can creep into?”

“Up those stairs and into my room with you!” said Crispin shortly. “I
will try to head them off. Come, man, stir yourself; they are here.”

Then, as with nimble alacrity Hogan obeyed him and slipped from the
room, he turned to the lad, who had been a silent spectator of what
had passed. From the pocket of his threadbare doublet he drew a pack of
greasy playing cards.

“To table,” he said laconically.

But the boy, comprehending what was required of him, drew back at sight
of those cards as one might shrink from a thing unclean.

“Never!” he began. “I'll not defile--”

“To table, fool!” thundered Crispin, with a vehemence few men could have
withstood. “Is this a time for Presbyterian scruples? To table, and help
a me play this game, or, by the living God, I'll--” Without completing
his threat he leaned forward until Kenneth felt his hot, wine-laden
breath upon his cheek. Cowed by his words, his gesture, and above all,
his glance, the lad drew up a chair, mumbling in explanation--intended
as an excuse to himself for his weakness--that he submitted since a
man's life was at stake.

Opposite him Galliard resumed his seat with a mocking smile that made
him wince. Taking up the cards, he flung a portion of them to the boy,
whilst those he retained he spread fanwise in his hand as if about to
play. Silently Kenneth copied his actions.

Nearer and louder grew the sounds of the approach, lights flashed before
the window, and the two men, feigning to play, sat on and waited.

“Have a care, Master Stewart,” growled Crispin sourly, then in a louder
voice--for his quick eye had caught a glimpse of a face that watched
them from the window--“I play the King of Spades!” he cried, with
meaning look.

A blow was struck upon the door, and with it came the command to “Open
in the King's name!” Softly Sir Crispin rapped out an oath. Then he
rose, and with a last look of warning to Kenneth, he went to open.
And as he had greeted Hogan he now greeted the crowd mainly of
soldiers--that surged about the threshold.

“Sirs, why this ado? Hath the Sultan Oliver descended upon us?”

In one hand he still held his cards, the other he rested upon the edge
of the open door. It was a young ensign who stood forward to answer him.

“One of Lord Middleton's officers hath done a man to death not half an
hour agone; he is an Irishman Captain Hogan by name.”

“Hogan--Hogan?” repeated Crispin, after the manner of one who fumbles in
his memory. “Ah, yes--an Irishman with a grey head and a hot temper. And
he is dead, you say?”

“Nay, he has done the killing.”

“That I can better understand. 'Tis not the first time, I'll be sworn.”

“But it will be the last, Sir Crispin.”

“Like enough. The King is severe since we crossed the Border.” Then in
a brisker tone: “I thank you for bringing me this news,” said he, “and I
regret that in my poor house there be naught I can offer you wherein to
drink His Majesty's health ere you proceed upon your search. Give you
good night, sir.” And by drawing back a pace he signified his wish to
close the door and be quit of them.

“We thought,” faltered the young officer, “that--that perchance you
would assist us by--”

“Assist you!” roared Crispin, with a fine assumption of anger. “Assist
you take a man? Sink me, sir, I would have you know I am a soldier, not
a tipstaff!”

The ensign's cheeks grew crimson under the sting of that veiled insult.

“There are some, Sir Crispin, that have yet another name for you.”

“Like enough--when I am not by,” sneered Crispin. “The world is full of
foul tongues in craven heads. But, sirs, the night air is chill and you
are come inopportunely, for, as you'll perceive, I was at play. Haply
you'll suffer me to close the door.”

“A moment, Sir Crispin. We must search this house. He is believed to
have come this way.”

Crispin yawned. “I will spare you the trouble. You may take it from me
that he could not be here without my knowledge. I have been in this room
these two hours past.”

“Twill not suffice,” returned the officer doggedly. “We must satisfy
ourselves.”

“Satisfy yourselves?” echoed the other, in tones of deep amazement.
“What better satisfaction can I afford you than my word? 'Swounds, sir
jackanapes,” he added, in a roar that sent the lieutenant back a pace
as though he had been struck, “am I to take it that your errand is a
trumped-up business to affront me? First you invite me to turn tipstaff,
then you add your cursed innuendoes of what people say of me, and now
you end by doubting me! You must satisfy yourself!” he thundered, waxing
fiercer at every word. “Linger another moment on that threshold, and
d----n me, sir, I'll give you satisfaction of another flavour! Be off!”

Before that hurricane of passion the ensign recoiled, despite himself.

“I will appeal to General Montgomery,” he threatened.

“Appeal to the devil! Had you come hither with your errand in a seemly
fashion you had found my door thrown wide in welcome, and I had received
you courteously. As it is, sir, the cause for complaint is on my side,
and complain I will. We shall see whether the King permits an old
soldier who has followed the fortunes of his family these eighteen years
to be flouted by a malapert bantam of yesterday's brood!”

The subaltern paused in dismay. Some demur there was in the gathered
crowd. Then the officer fell back a pace, and consulted an elderly
trooper at his elbow. The trooper was of opinion that the fugitive must
have gone farther. Moreover, he could not think, from what Sir Crispin
had said, that it would have been possible for Hogan to have entered the
house. With this, and realizing that much trouble and possible loss of
time must result from Sir Crispin's obstinacy, did they attempt to force
a way into the house, and bethinking himself, also, maybe, how well this
rascally ruffler stood with Lord Middleton, the ensign determined to
withdraw, and to seek elsewhere.

And so he took his leave with a venomous glance, and a parting threat
to bring the matter to the King's ears, upon which Galliard slammed the
door before he had finished.

There was a curious smile on Crispin's face as he walked slowly to the
table, and resumed his seat.

“Master Stewart,” he whispered, as he spread his cards anew, “the comedy
is not yet played out. There is a face glued to the window at this
moment, and I make little doubt that for the next hour or so we shall be
spied upon. That pretty fellow was born to be a thief-taker.”

The boy turned a glance of sour reproof upon his companion. He had not
stirred from his chair while Crispin had been at the door.

“You lied to them,” he said at last.

“Sh! Not so loud, sweet youth,” was the answer that lost nothing of
menace by being subdued. “Tomorrow, if you please, I will account to
you for offending your delicate soul by suggesting a falsehood in your
presence. To-night we have a man's life to save, and that, I think, is
work enough. Come, Master Stewart, we are being watched. Let us resume
our game.”

His eye, fixed in cold command upon the boy, compelled obedience.
And the lad, more out of awe of that glance than out of any desire to
contribute to the saving of Hogan, mutely consented to keep up this
pretence. But in his soul he rebelled. He had been reared in an
atmosphere of honourable and religious bigotry. Hogan was to him a
coarse ruffler; an evil man of the sword; such a man as he abhorred and
accounted a disgrace to any army--particularly to an army launched upon
England under the auspices of the Solemn League and Covenant.

Hogan had been guilty of an act of brutality; he had killed a man; and
Kenneth deemed himself little better, since he assisted in harbouring
instead of discovering him, as he held to be his duty. But 'neath the
suasion of Galliard's inexorable eye he sat limp and docile, vowing
to himself that on the morrow he would lay the matter before Lord
Middleton, and thus not only endeavour to make amends for his present
guilty silence, but rid himself also of the companionship of this
ruffianly Sir Crispin, to whom no doubt a hempen justice would be meted.

Meanwhile, he sat on and left his companion's occasional sallies
unanswered. In the street men stirred and lanthorns gleamed fitfully,
whilst ever and anon a face surmounted by a morion would be pressed
against the leaded panes of the window.

Thus an hour wore itself out during which poor Hogan sat above, alone
with his anxiety and unsavoury thoughts.




CHAPTER II. ARCADES AMBO


Towards midnight at last Sir Crispin flung down his cards and rose. It
was close upon an hour and a half since Hogan's advent. In the streets
the sounds had gradually died down, and peace seemed to reign again
in Penrith. Yet was Sir Crispin cautious--for to be cautious and
mistrustful of appearances was the lesson life had taught him.

“Master Stewart,” said he, “it grows late, and I doubt me you would be
abed. Give you good night!”

The lad rose. A moment he paused, hesitating, then--

“To-morrow, Sir Crispin--” he began. But Crispin cut him short.

“Leave to-morrow till it dawn, my friend. Give you good night. Take one
of those noisome tapers with you, and go.”

In sullen silence the boy took up one of the candle-bearing bottles and
passed out through the door leading to the stairs.

For a moment Crispin remained standing by the table, and in that moment
the expression of his face was softened. A momentary regret of his
treatment of the boy stirred in him. Master Stewart might be a milksop,
but Crispin accounted him leastways honest, and had a kindness for
him in spite of all. He crossed to the window, and throwing it wide he
leaned out, as if to breathe the cool night air, what time he hummed the
refrain of `Rub-a-dub-dub' for the edification of any chance listeners.

For a half-hour he lingered there, and for all that he used the occasion
to let his mind stray over many a theme, his eyes were alert for the
least movement among the shadows of the street. Reassured at last that
the house was no longer being watched, he drew back, and closed the
lattice.

Upstairs he found the Irishman seated in dejection upon his bed,
awaiting him.

“Soul of my body!” cried Hogan ruefully, “I was never nearer being
afraid in my life.”

Crispin laughed softly for answer, and besought of him the tale of what
had passed.

“Tis simple enough, faith,” said Hogan coolly. “The landlord of The
Angel hath a daughter maybe 'twas after her he named his inn--who owns
a pair of the most seductive eyes that ever a man saw perdition in. She
hath, moreover, a taste for dalliance, and my brave looks and martial
trappings did for her what her bold eyes had done for me. We were
becoming the sweetest friends, when, like an incarnate fiend, that
loutish clown, her lover, sweeps down upon us, and, with more jealousy
than wit, struck me--struck me, Harry Hogan! Soul of my body, think of
it, Cris!” And he grew red with anger at the recollection. “I took
him by the collar of his mean smock and flung him into the kennel--the
fittest bed he ever lay in. Had he remained there it had been well
for him; but the fool, accounting himself affronted, came up to demand
satisfaction. I gave it him, and plague on it--he's dead!”

“An ugly tale,” was Crispin's sour comment.

“Ugly, maybe,” returned Hogan, spreading out his palms, “but what choice
had I? The fool came at me, bilbo in hand, and I was forced to draw.'

“But not to slay, Hogan!”

“Twas an accident. Sink me, it was! I sought his sword-arm; but the
light was bad, and my point went through his chest instead.”

For a moment Crispin stood frowning, then his brow cleared, as though he
had put the matter from him.

“Well, well--since he's dead, there's an end to it.”

“Heaven rest his soul!” muttered the Irishman, crossing himself piously.
And with that he dismissed the subject of the great wrong that through
folly he had wrought--the wanton destruction of a man's life, and the
poisoning of a woman's with a remorse that might be everlasting.

“It will tax our wits to get you out of Penrith,” said Crispin. Then,
turning and looking into the Irishman's great, good-humoured face--“I am
sorry you leave us, Hogan,” he added.

“Not so am I,” quoth Hogan with a shrug. “Such a march as this is little
to my taste. Bah! Charles Stuart or Oliver Cromwell, 'tis all one to me.
What care I whether King or Commonwealth prevail? Shall Harry Hogan be
the better or the richer under one than under the other? Oddslife, Cris,
I have trailed a pike or handled a sword in well-nigh every army in
Europe. I know more of the great art of war than all the King's generals
rolled into one. Think you, then, I can rest content with a miserable
company of horse when plunder is forbidden, and even our beggarly pay
doubtful? Whilst, should things go ill--as well they may, faith, with
an army ruled by parsons--the wage will be a swift death on field or
gallows, or a lingering one in the plantations, as fell to the lot of
those poor wretches Noll drove into England after Dunbar. Soul of my
body, it is not thus that I had looked to fare when I took service at
Perth. I had looked for plunder, rich and plentiful plunder, according
to the usages of warfare, as a fitting reward for a toilsome march and
the perils gone through.

“Thus I know war, and for this have I followed the trade these twenty
years. Instead, we have thirty thousand men, marching to battle as prim
and orderly as a parcel of acolytes in a Corpus-Christi procession.
'Twas not so bad in Scotland haply because the country holds naught
a man may profitably plunder--but since we have crossed the Border,
'slife, they'll hang you if you steal so much as a kiss from a wench in
passing.”

“Why, true,” laughed Crispin, “the Second Charles hath an over-tender
stomach. He will not allow that we are marching through an enemy's
country; he insists that England is his kingdom, forgetting that he has
yet to conquer it, and--”

“Was it not also his father's kingdom?” broke in the impetuous Hogan.
“Yet times are sorely changed since we followed the fortunes of the
Martyr. In those days you might help yourself to a capon, a horse,
a wench, or any other trifle of the enemy's, without ever a word of
censure or a question asked. Why, man, it is but two days since His
Majesty had a poor devil hanged at Kendal for laying violent hands upon
a pullet. Pox on it, Cris, my gorge rises at the thought! When I
saw that wretch strung up, I swore to fall behind at the earliest
opportunity, and to-night's affair makes this imperative.”

“And what may your plans be?” asked Crispin.

“War is my trade, not a diversion, as it is with Wilmot and Buckingham
and the other pretty gentlemen of our train. And since the King's army
is like to yield me no profit, faith, I'll turn me to the Parliament's.
If I get out of Penrith with my life, I'll shave my beard and cut my
hair to a comely and godly length; don a cuckoldy steeple hat and a
black coat, and carry my sword to Cromwell with a line of text.”

Sir Crispin fell to pondering. Noting this, and imagining that he
guessed aright the reason:

“I take it, Cris,” he put in, keenly glancing at the other, “that you
are much of my mind?”

“Maybe I am,” replied Crispin carelessly.

“Why, then,” cried Hogan, “need we part company?”

There was a sudden eagerness in his tone, born of the admiration in
which this rough soldier of fortune held one whom he accounted his
better in that same harsh trade. But Galliard answered coldly:

“You forget, Harry.”

“Not so! Surely on Cromwell's side your object--”

“T'sh! I have well considered. My fortunes are bound up with the King's.
In his victory alone lies profit for me; not the profit of pillage,
Hogan, but the profit of those broad lands that for nigh upon twenty
years have been in usurping hands. The profit I look for, Hogan, is my
restoration to Castle Marleigh, and of this my only hope lies in the
restoration of King Charles. If the King doth not prevail--which God
forfend!--why, then, I can but die. I shall have naught left to hope for
from life. So you see, good Hogan,” he ended with a regretful smile, “my
going with you is not to be dreamed of.”

Still the Irishman urged him, and a good half-hour did he devote to it,
but in vain. Realizing at last the futility of his endeavours, he sighed
and moved uneasily in his chair, whilst the broad, tanned face was
clouded with regret. Crispin saw this, and approaching him, he laid a
hand upon his shoulder.

“I had counted upon your help to clear the Ashburns from Castle Marleigh
and to aid me in my grim work when the time is ripe. But if you go--”

“Faith, I may aid you yet. Who shall say?” Then of a sudden there crept
into the voice of this hardened pike-trader a note of soft concern.
“Think you there be danger to yourself in remaining?” he inquired.

“Danger? To me?” echoed Crispin.

“Aye--for having harboured me. That whelp of Montgomery's Foot suspects
you.”

“Suspects? Am I a man of straw to be overset by a breath of suspicion?”

“There is your lieutenant, Kenneth Stewart.”

“Who has been a party to your escape, and whose only course is therefore
silence, lest he set a noose about his own neck. Come, Harry,” he added,
briskly, changing his manner, “the night wears on, and we have your
safety to think of.”

Hogan rose with a sigh.

“Give me a horse,” said he, “and by God's grace tomorrow shall find me
in Cromwell's camp. Heaven prosper and reward you, Cris.”

“We must find you clothes more fitting than these--a coat more staid and
better attuned to the Puritan part you are to play.”

“Where have you such a coat?”

“My lieutenant has. He affects the godly black, from a habit taken in
that Presbyterian Scotland of his.”

“But I am twice his bulk!”

“Better a tight coat to your back than a tight rope to your neck, Harry.
Wait.”

Taking a taper, he left the room, to return a moment later with the coat
that Kenneth had worn that day, and which he had abstracted from the
sleeping lad's chamber.

“Off with your doublet,” he commanded, and as he spoke he set himself to
empty the pocket of Kenneth's garment; a handkerchief and a few papers
he found in them, and these he tossed carelessly on the bed. Next he
assisted the Irishman to struggle into the stolen coat.

“May the Lord forgive my sins,” groaned Hogan, as he felt the cloth
straining upon his back and cramping his limbs. “May He forgive me, and
see me safely out of Penrith and into Cromwell's camp, and never again
will I resent the resentment of a clown whose sweetheart I have made too
free with.”

“Pluck that feather from your hat,” said Crispin.

Hogan obeyed him with a sigh.

“Truly it is written in Scripture that man in his time plays many parts.
Who would have thought to see Harry Hogan playing the Puritan?”

“Unless you improve your acquaintance with Scripture you are not like to
play it long,” laughed Crispin, as he surveyed him. “There, man, you'll
do well enough. Your coat is somewhat tight in the back, somewhat short
in the skirt; but neither so tight nor so short but that it may be
preferred to a winding-sheet, and that is the alternative, Harry.”

Hogan replied by roundly cursing the coat and his own lucklessness. That
done--and in no measured terms--he pronounced himself ready to set out,
whereupon Crispin led the way below once more, and out into a hut that
did service as a stable.

By the light of a lanthorn he saddled one of the two nags that stood
there, and led it into the yard. Opening the door that abutted on to
a field beyond, he bade Hogan mount. He held his stirrup for him, and
cutting short the Irishman's voluble expressions of gratitude, he gave
him “God speed,” and urged him to use all dispatch in setting as great a
distance as possible betwixt himself and Penrith before the dawn.




CHAPTER III. THE LETTER


It was with a countenance sadly dejected that Crispin returned to his
chamber and sate himself wearily upon the bed. With elbows on his knees
and chin in his palms he stared straight before him, the usual steely
brightness of his grey eyes dulled by the despondency that sat upon his
face and drew deep furrows down his fine brow.

With a sigh he rose at last and idly fingered the papers he had taken
from the pocket of Kenneth's coat. As he did so his glance was arrested
by the signature at the foot of one. “Gregory Ashburn” was the name he
read.

Ashen grew his cheeks as his eyes fastened upon that name, whilst the
hand, to which no peril ever brought a tremor, shook now like an aspen.
Feverishly he spread the letter on his knee, and with a glance, from
dull that it had been, grown of a sudden fierce and cruel, he read the
contents.



DEAR KENNETH,

Again I write in the hope that I may prevail upon you to quit Scotland
and your attachment to a king, whose fortunes prosper not, nor can
prosper. Cynthia is pining, and if you tarry longer from Castle Marleigh
she must perforce think you but a laggard lover. Than this I have no
more powerful argument wherewith to draw you from Perth to Sheringham,
but this I think should prevail where others have failed me. We await
you then, and whilst we wait we daily drink your health. Cynthia
commends herself to your memory as doth my brother, and soon we hope to
welcome you at Castle Marleigh. Believe, my dear Kenneth, that whilst I
am, I am yours in affection.

                                             GREGORY ASHBURN

Twice Crispin read the letter through. Then with set teeth and straining
eyes he sat lost in thought.

Here indeed was a strange chance! This boy whom he had met at Perth,
and enrolled in his company, was a friend of Ashburn's--the lover of
Cynthia. Who might this Cynthia be?

Long and deep were his ponderings upon the unfathomable ways of
Fate--for Fate he now believed was here at work to help him, revealing
herself by means of this sign even at the very moment when he decried
his luck. In memory he reviewed his meeting with the lad in the yard
of Perth Castle a fortnight ago. Something in the boy's bearing, in his
air, had caught Crispin's eye. He had looked him over, then approached,
and bluntly asked his name and on what business he was come there. The
youth had answered him civilly enough that he was Kenneth Stewart
of Bailienochy, and that he was come to offer his sword to the King.
Thereupon he had interested himself in the lad's behalf and had gained
him a lieutenancy in his own company. Why he was attracted to a youth
on whom never before had he set eyes was a matter that puzzled him not
a little. Now he held, he thought, the explanation of it. It was the way
of Fate.

This boy was sent into his life by a Heaven that at last showed
compassion for the deep wrongs he had suffered; sent him as a key
wherewith, should the need occur, to open him the gates of Castle
Marleigh.

In long strides he paced the chamber, turning the matter over in his
mind. Aye, he would use the lad should the need arise. Why scruple? Had
he ever received aught but disdain and scorn at the hands of Kenneth.

Day was breaking ere he sought his bed, and already the sun was up when
at length he fell into a troubled sleep, vowing that he would mend his
wild ways and seek to gain the boy's favour against the time when he
might have need of him.

When later he restored the papers to Kenneth, explaining to what use he
had put the coat, he refrained from questioning him concerning Gregory
Ashburn. The docility of his mood on that occasion came as a surprise to
Kenneth, who set it down to Sir Crispin's desire to conciliate him into
silence touching the harbouring of Hogan. In that same connexion Crispin
showed him calmly and clearly that he could not now inform without
involving himself to an equally dangerous extent. And partly through
the fear of this, partly won over by Crispin's persuasions, the lad
determined to hold his peace.

Nor had he cause to regret it thereafter, for throughout that tedious
march he found his roystering companion singularly meek and kindly.
Indeed he seemed a different man. His old swagger and roaring bluster
disappeared; he drank less, diced less, blasphemed less, and stormed
less than in the old days before the halt at Penrith; but rode, a
silent, thoughtful figure, so self-contained and of so godly a mien as
would have rejoiced the heart of the sourest Puritan. The wild tantivy
boy had vanished, and the sobriquet of “Tavern Knight” was fast becoming
a misnomer.

Kenneth felt drawn more towards him, deeming him a penitent that had
seen at last the error of his ways. And thus things prevailed until the
almost triumphal entry into the city of Worcester on the twenty-third of
August.




CHAPTER IV. AT THE SIGN OF THE MITRE


For a week after the coming of the King to Worcester, Crispin's
relations with Kenneth steadily improved. By an evil chance, however,
there befell on the eve of the battle that which renewed with heightened
intensity the enmity which the lad had fostered for him, but which
lately he had almost overcome.

The scene of this happening--leastways of that which led to it--was The
Mitre Inn, in the High Street of Worcester.

In the common-room one day sat as merry a company of carousers as ever
gladdened the soul of an old tantivy boy. Youthful ensigns of
Lesley's Scottish horse--caring never a fig for the Solemn League and
Covenant--rubbed shoulders with beribboned Cavaliers of Lord Talbot's
company; gay young lairds of Pitscottie's Highlanders, unmindful of the
Kirk's harsh commandments of sobriety, sat cheek by jowl with rakehelly
officers of Dalzell's Brigade, and pledged the King in many a stoup of
canary and many a can of stout March ale.

On every hand spirits ran high and laughter filled the chamber, the
mirth of some having its source in a neighbour's quip, that of others
having no source at all save in the wine they had taken.

At one table sat a gentleman of the name of Faversham, who had ridden on
the previous night in that ill-fated camisado that should have
resulted in the capture of Cromwell at Spetchley, but which, owing to a
betrayal--when was a Stuart not betrayed and sold?--miscarried. He was
relating to the group about him the details of that disaster.

“Oddslife, gentlemen,” he was exclaiming, “I tell you that, but for that
roaring dog, Sir Crispin Galliard, the whole of Middleton's regiment had
been cut to pieces. There we stood on Red Hill, trapped as ever fish
in a net, with the whole of Lilburne's men rising out of the ground to
enclose and destroy us. A living wall of steel it was, and on every hand
the call to surrender. There was dismay in my heart, as I'll swear there
was dismay in the heart of every man of us, and I make little doubt,
gentlemen, that with but scant pressing we had thrown down our arms, so
disheartened were we by that ambush. Then of a sudden there arose above
the clatter of steel and Puritan cries, a loud, clear, defiant shout of
'Hey for Cavaliers!'”

“I turned, and there in his stirrups stood that madman Galliard, waving
his sword and holding his company together with the power of his will,
his courage, and his voice. The sight of him was like wine to our blood.
'Into them, gentlemen; follow me!' he roared. And then, with a hurricane
of oaths, he hurled his company against the pike-men. The blow was
irresistible, and above the din of it came that voice of his again: 'Up,
Cavaliers! Slash the cuckolds to ribbons, gentlemen!' The cropears gave
way, and like a river that has burst its dam, we poured through the
opening in their ranks and headed back for Worcester.”

There was a roar of voices as Faversham ended, and around that table
“The Tavern Knight” was for some minutes the only toast.

Meanwhile half a dozen merry-makers at a table hard by, having drunk
themselves out of all sense of fitness, were occupied in baiting a
pale-faced lad, sombrely attired, who seemed sadly out of place in that
wild company--indeed, he had been better advised to have avoided it.

The matter had been set afoot by a pleasantry of Ensign Tyler's, of
Massey's dragoons, with a playful allusion to a letter in a feminine
hand which Kenneth had let fall, and which Tyler had restored to him.
Quip had followed quip until in their jests they transcended all bounds.
Livid with passion and unable to endure more, Kenneth had sprung up.

“Damnation!” he blazed, bringing his clenched hand down upon the table.
“One more of your foul jests and he that utters it shall answer to me!”

The suddenness of his action and the fierceness of his tone and
gesture--a fierceness so grotesquely ill-attuned to his slender frame
and clerkly attire left the company for a moment speechless with
amazement. Then a mighty burst of laughter greeted him, above which
sounded the shrill voice of Tyler, who held his sides, and down whose
crimson cheeks two tears of mirth were trickling.

“Oh, fie, fie, good Master Stewart!” he gasped. “What think you would
the reverend elders say to this bellicose attitude and this profane
tongue of yours?”

“And what think you would the King say to this drunken poltroonery of
yours?” was the hot unguarded answer. “Poltroonery, I say,” he repeated,
embracing the whole company in his glance.

The laughter died down as Kenneth's insult penetrated their befuddled
minds. An instant's lull there was, like the lull in nature that
precedes a clap of thunder. Then, as with one accord, a dozen of them
bore down upon him.

It was a vile thing they did, perhaps; but then they had drunk deep, and
Kenneth Stewart counted no friend amongst them. In an instant they had
him, kicking and biting, on the floor; his doublet was torn rudely open,
and from his breast Tyler plucked the letter whose existence had led to
this shameless scene.

But ere he could so much as unfold it, a voice rang harsh and
imperative:

“Hold!”

Pausing, they turned to confront a tall, gaunt man in a leather jerkin
and a broad hat decked by goose-quill, who came slowly forward.

“The Tavern Knight,” cried one, and the shout of “A rouse for the hero
of Red Hill!” was taken up on every hand. For despite his sour visage
and ungracious ways there was not a roysterer in the Royal army to whom
he was not dear.

But as he now advanced, the coldness of his bearing and the forbidding
set of his face froze them into silence.

“Give me that letter,” he demanded sternly of Tyler.

Taken aback, Tyler hesitated for a second, whilst Crispin waited with
hand outstretched. Vainly did he look round for sign or word of help or
counsel. None was afforded him by his fellow-revellers, who one and all
hung back in silence.

Seeing himself thus unsupported, and far from wishing to try conclusions
with Galliard, Tyler with an ill grace surrendered the paper; and, with
a pleasant bow and a word of thanks, delivered with never so slight
a saturnine smile, Crispin turned on his heel and left the tavern as
abruptly as he had entered it.

The din it was that had attracted him as he passed by on his way to the
Episcopal Palace where a part of his company was on guard duty. Thither
he now pursued his way, bearing with him the letter which so opportunely
he had become possessed of, and which he hoped might throw further light
upon Kenneth's relations with the Ashburns.

But as he reached the palace there was a quick step behind him, and a
hand fell upon his arm. He turned.

“Ah, 'tis you, Kenneth,” he muttered, and would have passed on, but the
boy's hand took him by the sleeve.

“Sir Crispin,” said he, “I came to thank you.”

“I have done nothing to deserve your thanks. Give you good evening.” And
he made shift to mount the steps when again Kenneth detained him.

“You are forgetting the letter, Sir Crispin,” he ventured, and he held
out his hand to receive it.

Galliard saw the gesture, and for a moment it crossed his mind in
self-reproach that the part he chose to play was that of a bully. A
second he hesitated. Should he surrender the letter unread, and fight on
without the aid of the information it might bring him? Then the thought
of Ashburn and of his own deep wrongs that cried out for vengeance,
overcame and stifled the generous impulse. His manner grew yet more
frozen as he made answer:

“There has been too much ado about this letter to warrant my so lightly
parting with it. First I will satisfy myself that I have been no
unconscious abettor of treason. You shall have your letter tomorrow,
Master Stewart.”

“Treason!” echoed Kenneth. And before that cold rebuff of Crispin's his
mood changed from conciliatory to resentful--resentful towards the fates
that made him this man's debtor.

“I assure you, on my honour,” said he, mastering his feelings, “that
this is but a letter from the lady I hope to make my wife. Assuredly,
sir, you will not now insist upon reading it.”

“Assuredly I shall.”

“But, sir--”

“Master Stewart, I am resolved, and were you to talk from now till
doomsday, you would not turn me from my purpose. So good night to you.”

“Sir Crispin,” cried the boy, his voice quavering with passion, “while I
live you shall not read that letter!”

“Hoity-toity, sir! What words! What heroics! And yet you would have me
believe this paper innocent?”

“As innocent as the hand that penned it, and if I so oppose your reading
it, it is because thus much I owe her. Believe me, sir,” he added, his
accents returning to a beseeching key, “when again I swear that it is no
more than such a letter any maid may write her lover. I thought that you
had understood all this when you rescued me from those bullies at
The Mitre. I thought that what you did was a noble and generous deed.
Instead--” The lad paused.

“Continue, sir,” Galliard requested coldly. “Instead?”

“There can be no instead, Sir Crispin. You will not mar so good an
action now. You will give me my letter, will you not?”

Callous though he was, Crispin winced. The breeding of earlier days--so
sadly warped, alas!--cried out within him against the lie that he
was acting by pretending to suspect treason in that woman's pothooks.
Instincts of gentility and generosity long dead took life again,
resuscitated by that call of conscience. He was conquered.

“There, take your letter, boy, and plague me no more,” he growled, as he
held it out to Kenneth. And without waiting for reply or acknowledgment,
he turned on his heel, and entered the palace. But he had yielded
overlate to leave a good impression and, as Kenneth turned away, it was
with a curse upon Galliard, for whom his detestation seemed to increase
at every step.




CHAPTER V. AFTER WORCESTER FIELD


The morn of the third of September--that date so propitious to Cromwell,
so disastrous to Charles--found Crispin the centre of a company of
gentlemen in battle-harness, assembled at The Mitre Inn. For a toast he
gave them “The damnation of all crop-ears.”

“Sirs,” quoth he, “a fair beginning to a fair day. God send the evening
find us as merry.”

It was not to be his good fortune, however, to be in the earlier work
of the day. Until afternoon he was kept within the walls of Worcester,
chafing to be where hard knocks were being dealt--with Montgomery at
Powick Bridge, or with Pittscottie on Bunn's Hill. But he was forced to
hold his mood in curb, and wait until Charles and his advisers should
elect to make the general attack.

It came at last, and with it came the disastrous news that Montgomery
was routed, and Pittscottie in full retreat, whilst Dalzell had
surrendered, and Keith was taken. Then was it that the main body of the
Royal army formed up at the Sidbury Gate, and Crispin found himself in
the centre, which was commanded by the King in person. In the brilliant
charge that followed there was no more conspicuous figure, no voice
rang louder in encouragement to the men. For the first time that day
Cromwell's Ironsides gave back before the Royalists, who in that fierce,
irresistible charge, swept all before them until they had reached
the battery on Perry Wood, and driven the Roundheads from it
hell-to-leather.

It was a glorious moment, a moment in which the fortunes of the day hung
in the balance; the turn of the tide it seemed to them at last.

Crispin was among the first to reach the guns, and with a great shout of
“Hurrah for Cavaliers!” he had cut down two gunners that yet lingered.
His cry lacked not an echo, and a deafening cheer broke upon the
clamorous air as the Royalists found themselves masters of the position.
Up the hill on either side pressed the Duke of Hamilton and the Earl of
Derby to support the King. It but remained for Lesley's Scottish horse
to follow and complete the rout of the Parliamentarian forces. Had they
moved at that supreme moment who shall say what had been the issue of
Worcester field? But they never stirred, and the Royalists waiting on
Perry Wood cursed Lesley for a foul traitor who had sold his King.

With bitterness did they then realize that their great effort was to be
barren, their gallant charge in vain. Unsupported, their position grew
fast untenable.

And presently, when Cromwell had gathered his scattered Ironsides, that
gallant host was driven fighting, down the hill and back to the shelter
of Worcester. With the Roundheads pressing hotly upon them they gained
at last the Sidbury Gate, but only to find that an overset ammunition
wagon blocked the entrance. In this plight, and without attempting
to move it, they faced about to make a last stand against the Puritan
onslaught.

Charles had flung himself from his charger and climbed the obstruction,
and in this he was presently followed by others, amongst whom was
Crispin.

In the High Street Galliard came upon the King, mounted on a fresh
horse, addressing a Scottish regiment of foot. The soldiers had thrown
down their arms and stood sullenly before him, refusing to obey his
command to take them up again and help him attempt, even at that late
hour, to retrieve the fortunes of the day. Crispin looked on in scorn
and loathing. His passions awakened at the sight of Lesley's inaction
needed but this last breath to fan it into a very blaze of wrath. And
what he said to them touching themselves, their country, and the Kirk
Committee that had made sheep of them, was so bitter and contemptuous
that none but men in the most parlous and pitiable of conditions could
have suffered it.

He was still hurling vituperations at them when Colonel Pride with
a troop of Parliamentarian horse--having completely overcome the
resistance at the Sidbury Gate--rode into the town. At the news of this,
Crispin made a last appeal to the infantry.

“Afoot, you Scottish curs!” he thundered. “Would you rather be cut to
pieces as you stand? Up, you dogs, and since you know not how to live,
die at least without shame!”

But in vain did he rail. In sullen quiet they remained, their weapons on
the ground before them. And then, as Crispin was turning away to see to
his own safety, the King rode up again, and again he sought to revive
the courage that was dead in those Scottish hearts. If they would not
stand by him, he cried at last, let them slay him there, sooner than
that he should be taken captive to perish on the scaffold.

While he was still urging them, Crispin unceremoniously seized his
bridle.

“Will you stand here until you are taken, sire?” he cried. “Leave them,
and look to your safety.”

Charles turned a wondering eye upon the resolute, battle-grimed face of
the man that thus addressed him. A faint, sad smile parted his lips.

“You are right, sir,” he made answer. “Attend me.” And turning about he
rode down a side street with Galliard following closely in his wake.

With the intention of doffing his armour and changing his apparel, he
made for the house in New Street where he had been residing. As they
drew up before the door, Crispin, chancing to look over his shoulder,
rapped out an oath.

“Hasten, sire,” he exclaimed, “here is a portion of Colonel's Pride's
troop.”

The King looked round, and at sight of the Parliamentarians, “It is
ended,” he muttered despairingly. But already Crispin had sprung from
his horse.

“Dismount, sire,” he roared, and he assisted him so vigorously as to
appear to drag him out of the saddle.

“Which way?” demanded Charles, looking helplessly from left to right.
“Which way?”

But Crispin's quick mind had already shaped a plan. Seizing the royal
arm--for who in such straits would deal ceremoniously?--he thrust the
King across the threshold, and, following, closed the door and shot its
only bolt. But the shout set up by the Puritans announced to them that
their movement had been detected.

The King turned upon Sir Crispin, and in the half-light of the passage
wherein they stood Galliard made out the frown that bent the royal
brows.

“And now?” demanded Charles, a note almost of reproach in his voice.

“And now begone, sire,” returned the knight. “Begone ere they come.”

“Begone?” echoed Charles, in amazement. “But whither, sir? Whither and
how?”

His last words were almost drowned in the din without, as the Roundheads
pulled up before the house.

“By the back, sire,” was the impatient answer. “Through door or
window--as best you can. The back must overlook the Corn-Market; that is
your way. But hasten--in God's name hasten!--ere they bethink them of it
and cut off your retreat.”

As he spoke a violent blow shook the door.

“Quick, Your Majesty,” he implored, in a frenzy.

Charles moved to depart, then paused. “But you, sir? Do you not come
with me?”

Crispin stamped his foot, and turned a face livid with impatience upon
his King. In that moment all distinction of rank lay forgotten.

“I must remain,” he answered, speaking quickly. “That crazy door will
not hold for a second once a stout man sets his shoulder to it. After
the door they will find me, and for your sake I trust I may prove of
stouter stuff. Fare you well, sire,” he ended in a softer tone. “God
guard Your Majesty and send you happier days.”

And, bending his knee, Crispin brushed the royal hand with his hot lips.

A shower of blows clattered upon the timbers of the door, and one of
its panels was splintered by a musket-shot. Charles saw it, and with a
muttered word that was not caught by Crispin, he obeyed the knight, and
fled.

Scarce had he disappeared down that narrow passage, when the door gave
way completely and with a mighty crash fell in. Over the ruins of it
sprang a young Puritan-scarce more than a boy--shouting: “The Lord of
Hosts!”

But ere he had taken three strides the point of Crispin's tuck-sword
gave him pause.

“Halt! You cannot pass this way.”

“Back, son of Moab!” was the Roundhead's retort. “Hinder me not, at your
peril.”

Behind him, in the doorway, pressed others, who cried out to him to cut
down the Amalekite that stood between them and the young man Charles
Stuart. But Crispin laughed grimly for answer, and kept the officer in
check with his point.

“Back, or I cut you down,” threatened the Roundhead. “I am seeking the
malignant Stuart.”

“If by those blasphemous words you mean his sacred Majesty, learn that
he is where you will never be--in God's keeping.”

“Presumptuous hound,” stormed the lad, “giveway!”

Their swords met, and for a moment they ground one against the other;
then Crispin's blade darted out, swift as a lightning flash, and took
his opponent in the throat.

“You would have it so, rash fool,” he deprecated.

The boy hurtled back into the arms of those behind, and as he fell he
dropped his rapier, which rolled almost to Crispin's feet. The knight
stooped, and when again he stood erect, confronting the rebels in that
narrow passage, he held a sword in either hand.

There was a momentary pause in the onslaught, then to his dismay Crispin
saw the barrel of a musket pointed at him over the shoulder of one of
his foremost assailants. He set his teeth for what was to come, and
braced himself with the hope that the King might already have made good
his escape.

The end was at hand, he thought, and a fitting end, since his last hope
of redress was gone-destroyed by that fatal day's defeat.

But of a sudden a cry rang out in a voice wherein rage and anguish
were