THE
                             POSTAGE STAMPS,
                               ENVELOPES,
                        Wrappers, and Post Cards
                                 OF THE
                NORTH AMERICAN COLONIES OF GREAT BRITAIN.

                      With Autotype Illustrations.

                        _COMPILED AND PUBLISHED_
                                   BY
                     THE PHILATELIC SOCIETY, LONDON.

                         (ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.)

                              LONDON, 1889.




PREFACE.


Investigation into the history of the various and successive issues of
labels, wrappers, and envelopes connected with the Postal systems of the
British Colonies in North America does not present the difficulties which
had to be surmounted in the case of the Australian Colonies, and perhaps
does not therefore include subject matter of so interesting a character
as that comprised in the recent “Oceania” Catalogue.

Reference Lists of the North American Colonies have nevertheless been
hitherto crude, as well as deficient, and even incorrect in detail, thus
affording but superficial aid to the Philatelist: and the endeavour of
the Society in the following pages has been to amplify the information
at present in the possession of collectors; and by the collation of
contents of recent papers in Canadian and English journals, as well as by
reference to official gazettes and correspondence, to present as far as
possible a complete history of the Postal Service in these Colonies.

In this endeavour it has derived a large amount of assistance from the
researches of its late Secretary, Mr. E. D. Bacon, whose Notes at the
head of each Colony were originally intended to have been read as a paper
before the London Society, but which, by the desire of the Committee
entrusted with the revision and publication of the accompanying lists,
he has consented should be amalgamated with them, thus adding to the
completeness of the present work. The Society is also largely indebted to
Mr. Donald A. King for the permission to reproduce the valuable contents
of certain papers he contributed to the _Halifax Philatelist_.

The lists of Canada and Newfoundland, the only two of the Colonies now
using distinct stamps, have been completed to the end of June, 1889.

The same mode of illustration by the Autotype process, which proved
successful in the case of the “Stamps of Oceania,” has been adopted on
the present occasion, and is undoubtedly the most satisfactory of all
methods of reproduction in fac-simile which have come under the notice of
the Society.

_August, 1889._




LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS.


    T.  Top.
    B.  Bottom.
    R.  Right.
    L.  Left.
    c.  cent or cents.
    d.  dollar, penny, or pence.
    s.  shilling, or shillings.




BRITISH COLUMBIA AND VANCOUVER ISLAND.


PRELIMINARY NOTES.

_BY E. D. BACON._

Before laying before the members of the Society the few official notices
I have collected in reference to the Stamps of the North American
Colonies, I purpose prefacing what remarks I have to make in each case
with a short _resumé_ of the history of each of the provinces. These
historical particulars are taken for the most part from _The Colonial
Office List for 1889_, and are supplemented by additions from one or two
other works of reference.

British Columbia is situated on the north-west coast of North America,
and comprises the territory between the Rocky Mountains and the Pacific
Coast; bounded on the north by the 60th parallel, and on the south by
the United States, the average breadth being about 250 miles, and the
length of coast line 450 miles. The area (including Vancouver and Queen
Charlotte Islands) is about 341,000 square miles.

British Columbia was constituted a Crown Colony in 1858, owing to the
large immigration consequent on the discovery of gold in that year.
Vancouver Island, discovered in 1592 by Juan de Fuca, was leased to the
Hudson’s Bay Company in 1843, and made a Crown Colony in 1819. In 1866
the colonies of British Columbia and Vancouver Island were united, and
on July 20th, 1871, British Columbia entered the Dominion of Canada.
Vancouver Island is sometimes called QUADRA, after the Spanish commandant
on the coast of the mainland, at the time that the island was visited, in
1792, by the British naval officer, Captain George Vancouver, from whom
it derives its more usual name.

The earliest issue of _The Government Gazette, British Columbia_, I have
been able to find in this country is that of January 7th, 1865. This
number contains the following notices:

    “PUBLIC NOTICE.

    “_BRITISH COLUMBIA._

    “RATES OF POSTAGE.

    “Between British Columbia and Vancouver Island, delivered at
      Victoria or New Westminster, for each Letter under ½ ounce       3d.

    And for every additional ½ ounce or fractional excess              3d.

    For each Newspaper                                                 1d.

    On all Letters and Papers to or from abroad, and delivered or
      mailed at New Westminster, in addition to Foreign Postage,
      for each letter under ½ ounce                                    3d.

    And for every additional ½ ounce or fractional excess              3d.

    For each Newspaper                                                 1d.

    Between a Post Office at any one place in the Colony and a
      Post Office at any other place in the Colony, in all cases
      to be prepaid, for each Letter under ½ ounce                     6d.

    And for every additional ½ ounce or fractional excess              6d.

    For each Newspaper                                                 6d.

    “N.B.—Packages or Parcels other than Newspapers, and not
    exceeding 8 ounces in weight, will be charged at Letter rate of
    6d. per ½ ounce. No Parcel can be taken exceeding 8 ounces in
    weight.

                       “(Signed) WARNER R. SPALDING, _Postmaster-General_.

    “GENERAL POST OFFICE, _8th June, 1864_.”

    “PUBLIC NOTICE.

    “On and after the 20th day of June, 1864, all Letters and mail
    matter liable to postage must be prepaid. Until other stamps
    shall have been substituted there will be issued for the
    prepayment of postage the postage stamps at present in use,
    bearing the mark 2½d., for which the sum of 3d. will in future
    be charged.

                       (Signed) WARNER R. SPALDING, _Postmaster-General_.

    “GENERAL POST OFFICE, _11th June, 1864_.”

The above no doubt first appeared in _The Gazette_ about the middle
of June, 1864; but, as is customary with similar notices, copies were
published in subsequent numbers, and in this case continued to appear
until the latter end of 1865. Not having been fortunate enough to find
a file of _The Gazette_ for 1861—the year the Two Pence Halfpenny stamp
is said to have been first issued in—I am unable to give the exact day
this stamp came into use. I am inclined to think the stamp was first
solely used to prepay letters sent between New Westminster, the capital
of British Columbia, and Victoria, the capital of Vancouver Island. If
this was so, we see from the first of the above notices that this rate
was raised one halfpenny in June, 1864. It is apparent from the second
notice that whatever distance the old 2½d. rate formerly paid, it was
done away with or raised in the above month, as the stamp was to be
sold at 3d., pending the arrival of a new one bearing the higher value.
Perhaps it is as well for collectors that the idea of surcharging the
Two Pence Half penny stamp 3d. did not enter the Postmaster’s head, or
there is no telling how many varieties we should have had to add to our
albums if the surcharge differed in type, as it probably would have done.
The escape was no doubt due to the fact that at that time surcharges on
stamps were few in number, and most likely altogether unknown to the
Postal authorities of British Columbia. This Two Pence Halfpenny stamp
is certainly admissable into a collection as a provisional Three Pence,
provided it, or the paper it is attached to, is postmarked after June
19th, 1864. Another curious point in connection with the above notices
is to know how the newspaper rate of one penny was prepaid. The second
notice distinctly says, “All Letters and mail matter liable to postage
must be prepaid.... There will be issued for the prepayment of postage
the postage stamps at present in use.” Was this Three Penny provisional
divided in any way like so many of the other North American Colonies
stamps, or was the postage, even in face of the notice, prepaid in coin?
One of these two alternatives naturally suggests itself to have been the
case. I have never seen or heard of a copy of this stamp divided; but
as it could have been only employed for newspapers sent by two special
routes, the use of the stamp would probably be small, and the fact that
it was found upon newspapers alone would account for the disappearance
of specimens. We shall see from the next notice I give that the
provisional Three Penny stamp was in use down to the 1st November, 1865.
This notice is taken from _The Gazette_ for October 21st, 1865, and runs
as follows:

    “NOTICE.

                      “GENERAL POST OFFICE, _28th September, 1865._

    “It having been found necessary to issue a new postage stamp
    to meet the requirements of the Postal Ordinance, 1864, notice
    is hereby given that from and after the 1st November next the
    stamp at present in use will not be received by the Post Office
    Department. Persons in possession of the stamp at present
    in use may exchange the same on application at any of the
    Post-offices of British Columbia on or after the 1st November.

               “(Signed) WARNER R. SPALDING, _Postmaster-General_.”

The new postage stamp mentioned in the above is obviously the Three
Pence, blue, with large fancy letter “v” and Crown in the centre, which
is catalogued by M. Moens as issued on the 20th June, 1861, the date, we
have seen, the provisional Three Penny stamp came into use. Like that
provisional, I think it is possible the Three Pence, blue, may also have
been divided to prepay the one penny newspaper rate; but future research
will, I hope, definitely determine in each instance whether or not such
was the case.

The following list of Post-offices, with the names of the Postmasters,
was published in _The Gazette_, for April 14th, 1866. The list is chiefly
interesting as showing upon what a small scale the Postal Service of the
country then was, as at that time there were only sixteen Post-offices
opened throughout the whole colony.


LIST OF POST OFFICES IN BRITISH COLUMBIA.

    ----------------------------------+------------------------
              PLACE.                  |      POSTMASTER.
    ----------------------------------+------------------------
    New Westminster                   | W. R. Spalding, P.M.G.
    Hope                              | A. S. Hall.
    Douglas                           | Richard White.
    Lillooet                          | T. H. Sharwood.
    Yale                              | L. Agassiz.
    Lytton                            | W. M. Cochran.
    Ashcroft[A]                       | C. F. Cornwall.
    Clinton                           | J. Champness.
    Lake La Hache                     | W. Anderson.
    Soda Creek                        | J. T. Sanay.
    Quesnelmouth                      | F. Mevor.
    Van Winkle                        | L. Cahn.
    William’s Creek                   |
    Fort Shepherd                     | John Jane.
    Columbia River, Big Bend District |
    Kootenay                          |
    ----------------------------------+-------------------------

    [A] Ashcroft Post-office is the junction whence mail matter
        for Big Bend District will be forwarded.

On March 20th, 1867, an Act was passed which changed the currency of the
colony to the decimal system of cents and dollars. On March 13th, in the
same year, a new Postal Ordinance Act also became law. The following
clauses are taken from the latter:

    “IX. That on every Letter deposited in, or passing through,
    any Post-office in the Colony, and not exceeding half an ounce
    in weight, there shall be paid a postage according to the
    following scale; that is to say:

    At or between Victoria, or any Post-office in Vancouver
      Island and New Westminster, or any Port in the Colony    5 Cents.

    Between Vancouver Island or New Westminster and Clinton
      or Savana’s Ferry                                      12½ Cents.

    Beyond those distances                                    25 Cents.

    Between any two Post-offices above Yale, Hope, and
      Douglas                                                12½ Cents.

    And for every additional half an ounce, or fraction of half an
    ounce beyond the above weight, there shall be paid on each such
    Letter an additional postage, according to the foregoing rates.

    “X. That for every single Newspaper deposited in or passing
    through any Post-office in the Colony, there shall be paid a
    postage of Two Cents.”

I have been unable to find any notice in _The Gazette_ of the issue of
stamps surcharged with the value in cents, but they probably came into
use at the time the above Act was passed, or shortly afterwards. In
_The Gazette_ for January 18th, 1868, there is a notice giving certain
Postal rates in cents, and stating that “letters, papers, &c., for
Great Britain, Canada, the United States, Prince Edward Island, and
Newfoundland, must be prepaid in the Postage Stamps of the colony.” So
it is evident, from the plural word used, the _Cents_ stamps were then
in use. This set, as we know, consisted of the following values: 2, 5,
10, 25, 50 cents and 1 dollar. It is possible all the values may not have
appeared at once, but they are usually catalogued as one issue. As we
see from Clause X. of the Postal Ordinance 1867 Act, the Two Cents value
prepaid newspapers alone, which accounts for the stamp being so rarely
met with postmarked. Looking at the list of letter rates in Clause IX.,
we should expect to find a Twelve and a Half Cents stamp, but, as we
know, no such value was issued. Here again I can only suggest that the
Twenty-five Cents may have been divided, or the Five Cents cut in two,
and used in conjunction with a Ten Cents or two Five Cent stamps to make
up the required rate. The stamps of British Columbia were withdrawn from
use on July 20th, 1871, on the admittance of the colony into the Dominion
of Canada. Mr. N. Shakespeare is the present Postmaster of Victoria.


REFERENCE LIST OF THE PHILATELIC SOCIETY, LONDON.


Issue I. 1861.

_One value._ Engraved and type-printed by Messrs. De La Rue and Co.,
of London, on white, unwatermarked, slightly-surfaced paper; white
gum. Design: Diademed profile of Queen Victoria to left, on ground of
horizontal lines. Above and below the head are a straight and a curved
label of solid colour—one with convex, and the other with concave ends.
The upper labels are inscribed “BRITISH—COLUMBIA &,” and the lower ones
“VANCOUVERS—ISLAND” respectively, all in small white Roman capitals.
On either side are straight white labels, with rounded ends, inscribed
in coloured Roman capitals—“POSTAGE” on the left, reading upwards; and
“TWO PENCE—HALFPENNY” in two lines on the right, reading downwards.
The remainder of the stamp is filled in with reticulations, and two
outer lines of colour complete the design. Shape, upright rectangular.
(_Illustration 1._)

    (A) _Imperforate._

    2½d., rosy-brown.

    (B) _Perforated 14._

    2½d., rose, rosy-brown (shades).

_Remarks._—No postmarked copy of the imperforate variety is known to the
Society. The perforated stamp, although bearing the face value of Two
Pence Halfpenny, was sold at Three Pence, and did duty provisionally for
this latter value from 20th June, 1864, until 1st November, 1865, when it
was replaced by the Three Pence, blue, of the next issue.


Issue II. 1st November, 1865.

_One value._ Engraved and type-printed by Messrs. De La Rue and Co. on
white slightly-surfaced paper, watermarked Crown and CC; white gum;
machine perforated 14. The sheet is composed of 240 stamps, divided into
four panes, each containing sixty stamps, arranged in six horizontal
rows of ten. Design: Ornamental letter “v,” representing “Victoria,”
with heraldic rose inside, thistle on the left, and sprig of shamrock on
the right, surmounted by Gothic crown; is enclosed within a white oval
band, inscribed “BRITISH COLUMBIA POSTAGE” above and “THREE PENCE” below,
the two inscriptions being separated by a star-like ornament at either
side. The remainder of the stamp is filled in with a diaper pattern, the
corners being rounded, and the design is completed by a single outer line
of colour. Shape, upright rectangular. (_Illustration 2._)

    3d., blue, deep blue.


Issue III. 13th March (?), 1867.

_Six values._ All of the same design, and printed from the same die
as the preceding issue, but with the values in the altered currency,
surcharged in a straight line across the bottom of the stamp. The paper
is white wove, watermarked Crown and CC, and the perforation is 14 or
12½. Like the preceding issue, each sheet contains 240 stamps, which are
similarly disposed. The values are printed as follows: “TWO CENTS,” in
black block type; “5 CENT 5,” in black Roman capitals; “10 CENTS 10,” in
blue Roman capitals; “25 CENTS 25,” in violet Roman capitals; “50 CENTS
50,” in carmine Roman capitals; “1 DOLLAR 1,” in green Roman capitals.
Shape, upright rectangular. (_Illustrations 3, 4, 5._)

    (A) _Perforated 14._

    2 c. on 3d., bistre, black surcharge.
    5 c. on 3d., vermilion, black surcharge.
    10 c. on 3d., rose-pink, blue      ”
    25 c. on 3d., orange, violet       ”
    50 c. on 3d., mauve, carmine       ”
    1 d. on 3d., green, green          ”

    (B) _Perforated_ 12½.

    2 c. on 3d., bistre, black surcharge (?).
    5 c. on 3d., vermilion, black surcharge (shades).
    10 c. on 3d., rose-pink, blue      ”      ( ” ).
    25 c. on 3d., orange, violet       ”      ( ” ).
    50 c. on 3d., mauve, carmine       ”      ( ” ).
    1 d. on 3d., green, green          ”      ( ” ).

_Remarks._—The Two Cents has not been met with perforated 12½, by the
Society.


VANCOUVER ISLAND.


Issue I. July, 1865.

_Two values._ Engraved and type-printed by Messrs. De La Rue and Co.
on white wove paper, watermarked Crown and CC; white gum. Designs:
FIVE CENTS. Diademed profile of Queen Victoria to left, on ground of
horizontal lines, within a circle. Above and below are curved labels
of solid colour, inscribed with white block letters. Conventional
ornaments in spandrels, and outer border filled in with chequers. TEN
CENTS. Same portrait of Her Majesty in circle; straight coloured label
above, inscribed with white block letters; white label with rounded ends
below, with coloured block letters. Floriate ornaments in spandrels. An
outer line of colour completes the design of each value. Shape, upright
rectangular. (_Illustrations 6, 7._)

    T. “VANCOUVER ISLAND.” B. “FIVE CENTS.” “TEN CENTS.”

    (A) _Imperforate._

    5 c., rose.
    10 c., blue.

    (B) _Perforated_ 14.

    5 c., rose (shades).
    10 c., blue ( ” ).




CANADA.


PRELIMINARY NOTES.

_BY E. D. BACON._

Canada is said to have been discovered by Sebastian Cabot in 1497, but
this is not certain. In 1525 the French took possession of the country in
the name of the king of France, and ten years later Cartier explored the
St. Lawrence, so naming that splendid river from having entered it on St.
Lawrence’s Day.

In 1608 Quebec, the first settlement, was founded. The town succumbed to
the British forces under General Wolfe, and in 1763 the whole territory
of Canada was ceded to Great Britain by the Treaty of Paris.

In 1791 an Act of Parliament was passed dividing Canada into two
Provinces, Upper Canada (now Ontario) and Lower Canada (now Quebec),
and establishing a constitution for each. The provinces were afterwards
re-united in 1840.


THE DOMINION OF CANADA.

The Provinces of Ontario and Quebec (formerly constituting the Colony
of Canada), New Brunswick, and Nova Scotia, were by “The British North
American Act, 1867,” formed into one Dominion. This Act was brought into
force by Royal Proclamation, bearing date the 27th of May, 1867. On the
15th of July, 1870, the newly-formed province of Manitoba; on the 20th of
July, 1871, the colony of British Columbia; and on the 1st of July, 1873,
that of Prince Edward Island, were successively admitted to the Dominion,
Newfoundland now alone, of all the North American Colonies, retaining its
independence.

As far as I have been able to discover, Post-office notices relating
to the issue of stamps were not published in _The Canada Gazette_ with
other official matter. The number of _The Gazette_ for March 8th,
1851, contains a long notice, stating that on April 5th following the
management of the Inland Posts would be transferred to the control of the
Provincial Government, and that the new rates of postage would then come
into force. We learn from the report of the Postmaster-General of Great
Britain for 1857 what those rates were; for we read:

    “In 1851 a reduced rate of postage was established. Payment in
    advance is optional.

    On ordinary Letters                           per ½ oz., 3d.
    On Letters posted and delivered in the same town   each, ½d.

    “Newspapers are conveyed free.

    “Books are charged ½d. per oz., the weight of a single Packet
    being limited to 4 lbs.”

I should add, the local rate of ½d. did not come into use until 1857.
In giving these extracts from the Postmaster-General’s Report, I have
invariably altered the rates to their proper currency value, as they are
given in the list at “about” the sterling equivalent.

The rates to England in operation on May 1st, 1856, probably earlier,
were:

  Closed mail, _viâ_ U.S., by British Packet, not exceeding ½ oz.      10d.
  _Viâ_ Halifax                                     ”       ½ oz.      7½d.
  By U.S. Packet                                    ”       ½ oz.  1s. 5½d.
  And on October 1st, 1856, by Canadian Packet      ”       ½ oz.      7½d.

We know from the extract from the Report of the Postmaster-General of
Canada for 1851, given further on in the Society’s list, that the first
stamps consisted of a Three Penny, Six Penny, and One Shilling, and that
these three values were issued shortly after April 1st. Taking into
consideration the notice I have mentioned, it seems probable the issue
took place on April 5th, 1851. I can give no new information about any
of the later issues, and I shall conclude my remarks on this province
by giving some postal statistics taken from _The Colonial Office List_,
1889, which prove to what a huge system the Post-office establishment of
the Dominion has grown. We find, however, the present expenditure greatly
exceeds the revenue, owing, I am told, to the desire of the Government to
extend postal facilities as widely as possible. I understand some changes
have been made by an Act passed this year, one of which abolishes the
privilege hitherto granted to Canadian newspapers of free transmission by
post to subscribers from the publishing office.

The number of letters sent in the year ending 30th June, 1887, was
74,300,000; of post cards, 16,356,000; and of newspapers (other than
those sent from the office of publication, which are all carried free),
periodicals, parcels, &c., 31,160,000. The number of newspapers sent from
the office of publication was about 60,000,000; the number of letters
per head of population was 15.24; the number of offices was 7,534; the
revenue for 1887 was $2,603,255, and the expenditure $3,458,100. There
is weekly mail communication with Great Britain _viâ_ Quebec or Halifax,
and twice a week _viâ_ New York. There is a through daily service by the
Canadian-Pacific Railway to the Pacific Coast.

The present rates of postage are as follows:

                                           Letters.  Per ½ oz.  Newspapers.
                                                       Cents.     Cents.
    Canada and United States                              3      ½ each.
    Newfoundland                                          5      ½ each.
    Europe, Egypt, the West Indies, and British Guiana    5      1 per oz.
    South and West Africa, China, East Indies,
      Mauritius, Straits Settlements, South America      10      2 per oz.
    Australasia                                          15      2 per oz.
    Ditto, _viâ_ Brindisi                                19      3 per oz.

There is a Parcels Post to Newfoundland, the United States, and Europe.
The present Postmaster-General is the Hon. J. G. Haggart.


REFERENCE LIST OF THE PHILATELIC SOCIETY, LONDON.


Issue I. 5th (?) April, 1851.

_Three values._ Engraved and printed in _taille-douce_ by Messrs.
Rawdon, Wright, Hatch, and Edson, of New York, on thin white paper;
laid horizontally in the case of the Three Pence, and vertically in
the other two values; brownish gum. Designs: THREE PENCE.—Beaver on
bank of river; trees in the distance, with sun shining above them; oval
coloured frame, broken at the top by a Royal Crown, beneath which are
heraldic flowers, with “V” on the left and “R” on the right. The oval is
inscribed with white Roman capitals. In each spandrel is an arabesque
and the Arabic numeral of value. Two plain outer lines complete the
design. SIX PENCE.—Nearly full face bust portrait of Prince Albert, in
military uniform, looking to right, within coloured oval, lettered in
white Roman capitals. Heraldic flowers on either side separate the upper
and lower portions of the inscription. Arabesques and Arabic numeral
of value in each spandrel; border of two plain outer lines. TWELVE
PENCE.—Three-quarter face bust portrait of Queen Victoria on ground
of horizontal lines, looking to left, with diadem and necklace within
coloured oval, inscribed in white Roman capitals; a Crown on either side
separating the upper and lower parts of the inscription. Arabesques and
Arabic numerals of value in each spandrel; border of two plain outer
lines. Shapes: small oblong rectangular for the Three Pence; small
upright rectangular for the Six Pence and Twelve Pence. (_Illustrations
8, 9, 10._)

    T. “CANADA POSTAGE.” B. “THREE PENCE,” “SIXPENCE,” “TWELVE PENCE.”

    3d., vermilion (shades).
    6d., purple-black ( ” ).
    12d., black.

_Remarks._—In _The Halifax Philatelist_ for July, 1888, a copy of the
official order notifying the issue of these three stamps is given. It is
as follows:

    “P.O. DEPARTMENT. (ORDER NO. 4.)

                     “P. O. DEPARTMENT, TORONTO, _1st April, 1851_.

    “_Stamps for Prepayment of Postage on Letters._

    “Postage Stamps are about to be issued, one representing the
    beaver, of the denomination of 3 pence; the second representing
    the head of Prince Albert, of the denomination of 6 pence;
    and the third representing the head of Her Majesty, of the
    denomination of 1 shilling, which will shortly be transmitted
    to the postmasters at important points.”


Issue II. 1852.

_Three values._ Identical in type with the preceding, but printed upon
white wove paper. The paper varies considerably in substance, especially
in the Three Penny value, which ranges from stout to nearly pelure.
The latter value is also found printed upon closely-ribbed thin paper.
(_Illustrations 8, 9, 10._)

    (A) _Wove paper._

    3d., vermilion, orange-vermilion (shades).
    6d., black, olive-black, dull purple, dull violet (shades).
    12d., black.

    (B) _Closely-ribbed thin paper._

    3d., vermilion.

_Remarks._—The Twelve Pence has not been catalogued before as found upon
wove paper, but undoubted used copies have been seen by members of the
Society.


Issue III. 1855-57.

_Three values._ Engraved and printed in _taille-douce_ by Messrs.
Rawdon, Wright, Hatch, and Edson on white wove or closely-ribbed
paper; brownish gum. Designs: TEN PENCE.—Profile bust portrait of
Jacques Cartier to right, on ground of horizontal lines, within an
oval, coloured border, inscribed with white Roman capitals. A cluster
of leaves on the left and a beaver on the right separate the upper
inscription from the lower; cross-hatched spandrels. In the upper “8d.
STG.,” or sterling; in the lower “10 CY.,” or currency, in white. Outer
border of two plain, coloured lines. SEVEN PENCE HALFPENNY.—The same
portrait of Queen Victoria as in the Twelve Pence of the first issue,
within coloured oval frame, inscribed with white block letters, the
upper inscription now reading “CANADA PACKET POSTAGE.” The upper and
lower left spandrels are inscribed “6d. STG.,” or sterling; and the
upper and lower right spandrels “7½d. CY.,” or currency, all in white,
on coloured cross-hatched ground. Outer border of two plain lines.
HALFPENNY.—Diademed profile of Queen Victoria to left, on ground of
horizontal lines, in oval frame, lettered with white Roman capitals;
reticulated spandrels; outer border of two plain lines. Shape, small
upright rectangular. (_Illustrations 11, 12, 13._)

    T. “CANADA POSTAGE.” B. “TEN PENCE,” “SIX PENCE STERLING,” “ONE
    HALF PENNY.”

    (A) _Wove paper._

    1st April, 1855, 10d., Prussian-blue (shades).
    2nd June, 1857, 7½d., grass-green ( ” ).
    18th July, 1857, ½d., rose ( ” ).

    (B) _Closely-ribbed thin paper._

    ½d., rose.

_Remarks._—Two _soi-disant_ provisionals have been chronicled; viz., the
Halfpenny surcharged in black—one with an Arabic numeral “1,” and the
other with “8d. STG.” The Society can furnish no information concerning
these two stamps; but supposing the surcharges to be genuine, they are
probably only notifications of insufficient postage applied after the
letters were posted.

With regard to the portrait on the Ten Pence, tradition has always
assigned it to Jacques Cartier; but in the Catalogue of the Collection
of Stamps, &c., in the Museum at the Berlin Post Office, it is given
as that of Sebastian Cabot. However, as the same catalogue pronounces
the portrait on the Six Pence of issue I. to be that of Lord Elgin,
it is probably equally incorrect in the former case, more especially
as a writer in _The Halifax Philatelist_ for July, 1888, says “it is
identically the same as that of all the existing portraits of Jacques
Cartier, and totally unlike those existing of Sebastian Cabot.”

In the same article on _Canadian Stamps_ in _The Halifax Philatelist_ an
extract from the Postmaster-General’s Report for the year 1855 is given,
showing us the reason for the issue of the Ten Pence value. It was, “To
promote the general convenience in prepaying letters to Great Britain at
the new rate, postage stamps of the value of 10 pence currency, equal to
8 pence sterling, were procured and issued for sale.” The same article
gives the following extracts from the Postmaster-General’s Report for
1857: “To facilitate the prepayment of letters passing from Canada to
England by the Canadian steamers, a new stamp bearing the value of 6
pence sterling, or 7½ pence currency, being the Canadian Packet rate,
has been secured and put in circulation.” The article goes on to say,
“This stamp was rendered necessary on account of the contract between
the Canadian Government and the Allan Line of Steamers in regard to
carrying the mails, and by which contract the postage was reduced.” The
other extracts read: “A new stamp has also been introduced of the value
½ penny to serve as the medium for prepaying transient newspapers.”
“Moreover, the Department has been led by the increasing use of postage
stamps to take measures for obtaining the Canadian Postage Stamps on
sheets perforated in the dividing line in the manner adopted in England,
to facilitate the separation of a single stamp from the others on a sheet
when required for use.”


Issue IV. 1857.

_Three values._ Previously described, but machine-perforated.
(_Illustrations 8, 9, 13._)

    (A) _Laid paper. Perforated 12._

    6d., dull purple.

    (B) _Closely-ribbed thin paper. Perforated 12._

    ½d., rose.
    3d., vermilion.

    (C) _Wove paper. Perforated 12._

    ½d., rose (shades)
    3d., vermilion (shades)
    6d., violet-black (shades).

    _Sub-variety. Perforated 13._

    3d., vermilion.

_Remarks._—The Seven Pence Halfpenny, green, and Ten Pence, blue,
perforated, exist in the collection of a well-known Parisian collector.
The authenticity, however, of the perforations appears to be doubtful.


Issue V. 1st July, 1859, and 1st August, 1864.

_Six values._ Printed by the American Bank Note Co., and consisting of
the previous designs, slightly modified in order to change the currency
from pence, to cents. ONE CENT.—The same as the One Halfpenny, save
for the alteration in value. TWO CENTS.—Almost the same design as
the One Cent, but differing somewhat in the spandrels, each of which
contains an oval, with Arabic numeral of value. This stamp was not
issued until 1st August, 1864. FIVE CENTS.—Same design as the Three
Pence, with substitution of the new value and numerals of value and
small ornaments between the two portions of the inscriptions. Spandrels
cross-hatched. TEN CENTS.—Same design as the Sixpence, with substitution
of the new value, and the Roman numeral “X” in each spandrel. TWELVE
AND A HALF CENTS.—Same design as the Seven Pence Halfpenny of 1857,
with substitution of the new value in the spandrels only. SEVENTEEN
CENTS.—Same design as the Ten Pence of 1835, with substitution of the
new value in the oval, and in the lower spandrels. The leaves and
beaver which separate the inscription in the Ten Pence are replaced by
small oval ornaments. The paper of this issue varies considerably in
substance, and the perforation is 12. Shapes: small oblong rectangular
for the Five Cents; small upright rectangular for the other five values.
(_Illustrations 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19._)

    1 c., rose (shades).
    2 c.,  ”   (shades).
    5 c., vermilion (shades).
    10 c., brown, black-brown, brown-lilac, reddish-lilac, purple (many
      shades).
    12½ c., green, emerald-green (shades).
    17 c., Prussian-blue (shades).

_Varieties._—(A) The Five Cents has been met with imperforate. (B) The
Five Cents is also known cut in half and used with a Ten Cents to make up
the “packet” rate of 12½ Cents.


ENVELOPES.

_Two values._ On paper laid obliquely, watermarked “Ca” above “P.O.D.”
(Canadian Post Office Department?), in double-lined letters, repeated
twice in each envelope. Size, 5½ × ¼ inches. Yellowish gum, extending
nearly the length of the flap. The stamp is embossed in the right upper
corner. Design: Diademed head of Queen Victoria to left in white relief,
on ground of solid colour, enclosed within a narrow oval band inscribed
in Roman capitals, in white relief, “CANADA POSTAGE” at the top, and
the value in words at the bottom. Shape of stamp, small upright oval.
(_Illustrations 20, 21._)

    (A) _On yellowish-white laid paper. Flap rounded._

    5 c., vermilion.
    10 c., brown.

    (B) _On bluish-white laid paper. Flap more pointed than in Variety A._

    5 c., vermilion.
    10 c., brown (l)


THE DOMINION OF CANADA.


Issue I. March and April, 1868.

_Seven values._ Engraved and printed in _taille-douce_ by the
British-American Bank Note Company, of Montreal and Ottawa, on white
wove paper, varying greatly in substance, or on white laid paper; white
gum; machine perforated 12. Designs: The central design is the same
in each value, and consists of a diademed profile portrait of Queen
Victoria to right, on background of horizontal lines, enclosed within a
narrow circular white line. The borders, the shape of the labels, and
the position of the numerals, vary in each value. Shapes, small upright
rectangular for the Half Cent, large upright rectangular for the other
six values. (_Illustrations 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28._)

    T. “CANADA POSTAGE.” B. “HALF CENT,” “ONE CENT,” “TWO,”
    “THREE,” “SIX,” “TWELVE AND A HALF,” “FIFTEEN CENTS.”

    (A) _White wove paper._

    ½ c., black.
    1 c., brown-red (shades).
    1 c., orange-yellow (  ”   ).
    2 c., green, yellow-green (  ”   ).
    3 c., red (  ”   ).
    6 c., brown (  ”   ).
    12½ c., blue (  ”   ).
    15 c., lilac (  ”   ).

    (B) _White horizontal laid paper._

    1 c., brown-red.
    1 c., yellow.
    3 c., red (shades).

    (C) _Bluish-white wove paper._

    ½ c., black.

_Remarks._—The One Cent, yellow, on laid paper, is not known to the
Society. It is taken from _The Halifax Philatelist_ for July, 1888,
page 74. Some of the stamps on wove paper have been catalogued with a
watermark, consisting of various letters. It is probable these letters
are portions of the name of the papermaker, which most likely exists in
the margin of the sheets. The Half Cent, on bluish paper, is taken from
the sixth edition of M. Moens’ _Catalogue_.


Issue II. 1870-1874.

_Five values_.—Engraved and printed in _taille-douce_ by the
British-American Bank Note Company on white wove paper, varying in
substance; white gum; machine perforated 12. The entire sheets contain
100 stamps, each in ten rows of ten. The size of the stamps and the
designs are similar to that of the Half Cent of the preceding issue,
except as regards the borders of the stamps, which differ for each
value. The Six Cents was not issued until January, 1872; while the Ten
Cents did not make its appearance until the end of 1874. (_Illustrations
29, 30, 31, 32, 33._)

    1 c., orange, yellow (shades).
    2 c., green, yellow-green (shades).
    3 c., vermilion, red, rose, vermilion-red (shades).
    6 c., brown (shades).
    10 c., lilac-rose (shades).

    _Varieties._

    (A) 3 c., imperforate,
    (B) 5 c., perf. 13½ × 12.

_Remarks._—_The Halifax Philatelist_, in its number for February, 1887,
mentions that the Three Cents exists in very dark brown, almost black.
The specimen seen was unused, and purchased among others from the Post
Office. Probably the change in colour is due to oxidation, or some other
accidental cause.


Issue III. 1875-1876.

_One Value._ Similar in design to the stamps of the two last issues.
The stamp first appeared on October 1st, 1875, with large dimensions,
like those of Issue I.; but in March, 1876, the size was reduced to that
of the stamps of Issue II. The perforation of both varieties is 12.
(_Illustrations 34, 35._)

    (A) _Large size._

    5 c., bronze-green (shades).

    (B) _Small size._

    5 c., bronze-green (shades).


Issue IV. 1877-1880.

_One value._ The Fifteen Cents of Issue I. printed in modified colours.
The perforation remains 12. (_Illustration 28._)

    January, 1877. 15 c., grey-violet (shades).
    End 1880. 15 c., slate ( ” ).


Issue V. July, 1882.

_One value._ A Half Cent stamp of similar design to that of Issue I.,
but of much smaller dimensions; printed upon white wove paper, and
perforated 12. The stamp was produced by the same firm as the preceding
issues, and the sheet contains 100 stamps, in ten rows of ten, as before.
(_Illustration 36._)

    ½ c., black.


Issue VI. 1888.

_Three values._ Consisting of the Two and Ten Cents, Issue II., and
the Five Cents, issued in March, 1876, with the colours modified. The
Two Cents was described in the Philatelic journals of the above year
as printed from a new die, but on comparing the stamp carefully with
that first issued, no alteration can be discovered in the design.
(_Illustrations 30, 35, 33._)

    2 c., emerald-green (shades).
    5 c., greenish-grey ( ” ).
    10 c., carmine-red ( ” ).


REGISTRATION STAMPS.


Issue I. November 15th, 1875.

_Three values._ Engraved and printed in _taille-douce_ by the
British-American Bank Note Co. on white wove paper; white gum;
machine-perforated 12. Design: an engine-turned _cartouche_, with
scalloped edges at top and bottom, and labels, with value in full, at
the two ends. Small straight label above inscribed “CANADA;” large
curved label in centre, with “REGISTERED,” and smaller curved label
below, with “LETTER STAMP,” all in white Roman capitals. Large Arabic
numeral of value in the upper corners. Shape, narrow oblong rectangular.
(_Illustration 37._)

    2 c., orange-vermilion   (shades).
    2 c., brown (error?).
    2 c., vermilion-red, 1888 ( ” ).
    5 c., green, yellow-green ( ” ).
    8 c., blue, dark blue     ( ” ).

    _Variety._

    5 c., green, imperforate.

_Remarks_.—The Eight Cents was withdrawn from circulation in January,
1878. The Five Cents imperforate is taken from _The Halifax Philatelist_
for November, 1888. With regard to the much disputed Two Cents, brown,
the members of the Society think they cannot do better than reproduce
here the interesting article published in the above-mentioned paper for
January, 1888, upon this stamp.

    “THE CANADIAN ERROR.

    “The Canada Two Cent brown registration, is at this time
    mentioned frequently in the _Figaro_ and several other
    philatelic publications. As there seems to be considerable
    doubt as to the origin, and as I was in the main instrumental
    in introducing them to the philatelic public, I have decided to
    give the information I possess on this subject to them.

    “About the beginning of January, 1887, I was shown a registered
    letter received from Miscou Lighthouse Post-office, in New
    Brunswick. It had a BROWN Two Cent registration stamp on
    it—a clear unmistakable dark brown. I immediately wrote the
    postmaster there for information relative to them. He answered
    and said that he had twenty-three on hand; that he had
    originally received fifty from the Post Office Department at
    Ottawa; and that they were BROWN when he received them. This he
    stated positively. I then sent to him for them, but before my
    letter reached him he had used two of them, so that I received
    only twenty-one.

    “Those stamps I showed to several philatelists, and could not
    get two to agree as to their origin. Some said the change in
    colour was due to the gum, others to chemical changes, others
    again said it was due to the atmosphere from the salt water.
    Very few would allow a misprint. In the meantime Mr. F. C. Kaye
    came across another registered letter with brown registration
    stamp. This time it was from the Post-office of New Ross, in
    Lunenburg Co., N.S. From this office about fifty were obtained.
    The postmaster at this office was also positive as to having
    received them from the Department at Ottawa in brown. The
    same objections were raised to those as to the others, as to
    whether they were genuine misprints or not. In this case the
    atmosphere of salt water was not the cause, as New Ross is
    in the interior. If the gum was the cause of their changing
    colour, it is peculiar we do not get more of them. Changes by
    chemical means were also tried. The only thing which would turn
    the red of the genuine colour to brown was sulphuric acid mixed
    with water, and this did not give a good clear colour, having
    a somewhat greyish shade in it. Those experiments have, in my
    opinion, confirmed their genuineness. And now as if to make
    assurance in regard to their genuineness more sure, we find a
    third Post-office with them. This was Beauly, in Antigonish
    Co., N.S. There were, however, only six received from there.
    The postmaster had the same story as the others—he had received
    them from the Department at Ottawa in a brown colour.

    “After reading this, I do not think that any reasonable-minded
    person will doubt their genuineness.

    “The Department at Ottawa was written to in regard to them,
    but, as was to be expected, knew nothing of them whatsoever. No
    doubt if they had been seen they would not have been allowed to
    be issued to the public.

    “We do not deny that time does change the colour in stamps,
    but with those we do not think that it had anything to do. A
    friend of ours informed us that in looking over a lot of old
    letters which he had taken out of a trunk, and which had not
    been opened for several years, he found among them several
    registered letters, one with the Two Cent registration stamp
    almost a black, all the others having their normal colour. With
    due consideration and deference to better judges than myself,
    I have no doubt in saying that it is my firm belief that those
    Canada Two Cent, brown, registration stamps are a genuine
    misprint.

                                                  “DONALD A. KING.”

The members have not had an opportunity of examining any of the specimens
referred to in Mr. King’s paper, so they are unable to give an opinion
upon them. At the same time it should be stated that copies of this
stamp are frequently met with showing traces of oxidation; some changed
completely to brown or even black in colour. It seems therefore probable
that the specimens described by Mr. King may be referred to the same
category.


OFFICIAL STAMP FOR RETURNED LETTERS.


1879 (?).

The stamp in shape is a large oblong rectangular, printed in
_taille-douce_ upon white wove paper, and perforated 12. The design
consists of a straight label of solid colour inscribed, in white block
letters, “OFFICIALLY SEALED;” above this are the words “POST OFFICE
CANADA,” in a curved line; and below the label “DEAD LETTER OFFICE,” also
in a curve, both inscriptions being in small coloured Roman capitals. The
rest of the design is composed of engine-turning, with ornaments of a
trefoil character in the four corners. (_Illustration 38._)

    Without expressed value; dark red-brown.

_Remarks._—The only information the Society can give about this stamp is
contained in an article in _The Halifax Philatelist_ for December, 1887,
which is reproduced here for the benefit of those collectors who may not
have seen it.

    “THE ‘OFFICIALLY SEALED’ DEAD LETTER OFFICE STAMP OF CANADA.

    “While endeavouring to afford some information about those
    interesting and handsome adhesives emanating only from the Dead
    Letter Office at Ottawa, I regret being unable to give all
    their history or chronology. What is said here the writer has
    gained his knowledge by observation and experience. Doubtless
    there are others who can speak of matters connected with these
    stamps which the writer knows nothing of. In the first place
    they are scarce, very, which is to be accounted for when we
    consider the manner of their use. They are never found on
    Local Dead Letters, registered or unregistered. What have been
    seen here have all come from the United States, and always on
    returned dead registered letters. I discovered the manner of
    their use quite accidentally. A friend who travels in Canada
    for a United States firm showed me a letter which had been
    returned to his address in Michigan, and which he had posted in
    Canada for a Canadian address, and registered; and for some
    reason, misdirection or what not, the letter was not delivered
    to party addressed—had been sent to Dead Letter Office, Ottawa,
    where, on being opened to ascertain address of writer, it was
    resealed and adorned by Dead Letter Office Crown Official Seal
    Stamp, sent to Dead Letter Office, Washington, U.S., and then
    sent on registered to the writer’s address in Michigan, where
    he obtained it, and exhibited it triumphantly to me.

    “The stamp itself is a large oblong, 17 × 34, perforated, and
    printed in brown, on thick white paper. Inscribed in three
    lines, ‘POST OFFICE, CANADA—OFFICIALLY SEALED—DEAD LETTER
    OFFICE.’

    “It would be appropriate to have the colour of the stamp
    _black_.

                                                  “No. 2, C. P. A.”


ENVELOPES.


Issue I. End of 1877.

_Two values._ On white paper, laid obliquely, without watermark;
yellowish gum, extending nearly the whole length of the flap, which
is pointed. The stamp is embossed in the right upper corner. Design:
Diademed head of Queen Victoria to left in white relief, on ground of
solid colour, enclosed by an oval band inscribed in Roman capitals, in
white relief, “CANADA POSTAGE” at the top, and the value in words at the
bottom. Shape of stamp, large upright oval. (_Illustrations 39, 40._)

    _Size A._ 5⁹⁄₂₀ × 3¹⁄₁₀ _inches_.

    1 c., very pale to very dark blue.
    3 c., vermilion (shades).

    _Size B._ 5⁹⁄₁₀ × 3³⁄₁₀ _inches_.

    3 c., vermilion (shades).


Issue II. 1881.

_Two values._ Similar in all respects to the last issue, except that the
flap is tongue-shaped, instead of being pointed. (_Illustrations 39, 40._)

    _Size A._ 5⁹⁄₂₀ × 3¹⁄₁₀ _inches_.

    1 c., blue (shades).
    3 c., vermilion (shades).

    _Size B._ 5⁹⁄₁₀ × 3³⁄₁₀ _inches_.

    3 c., vermilion (?).


Issue III. 1888.

_Two values._ Same as the last issue, but the paper is rosy-white in
tint. (_Illustrations 39, 40._)

    _Size A._ 5⁹⁄₂₀ × 3¹⁄₁₀ _inches_.

    1 c., blue.
    3 c., vermilion (?).

    _Size B._ 5⁹⁄₁₀ × 3³⁄₁₀ _inches_.

    3 c., vermilion.

_Remarks._—The envelopes and wrappers of Issues I. and II., and the cards
of Issue V., are frequently met with, with the stamp surcharged in red,
blue, or black with the word “OFFICIAL” or “SERVICE,” and sometimes the
arms of Great Britain are found added to the left of the stamp, and “HEAD
QUARTERS—63RD RIFLES” in two lines lower down, to left. These surcharges
are in no way official, but merely due to private speculation.


WRAPPERS.


Issue I. May, 1875, to end 1881.

_One value._ On light buff and yellowish-white wove unwatermarked paper.
The stamp is impressed at the right side of the wrapper, about two and a
half inches from the top. Design: Diademed profile of Queen Victoria to
right upon a background of ho